## Organization

### Questions

The *dictum ante canonem* (abbreviated d.a.c.) and *dictum initiale*
(abbreviated d.init.) are special cases of *dicta* and, like the *dictum
post canonem*, were written by Gratian (i.e., the person performing the
author-function at that place in the text).

The emphasis of the discussion of *dicta ante* will necessarily be on
their function in the organization of Part II. The questions in Part II
are formally coordinate with the distinctions in Part I, *de Pen*. and
Part III.

There are 8,371 words in the first-recension *dicta ante* in Part II.
Four *dicta ante* (C.11 q.2 d.a.c.1, C.17 q.2 d.a.c.1, C.17 q.3 d.a.c.1,
and C.22 q.3 d.a.c.1) were added in their entirety to the second
recension, presumably because the questions they introduced were not
added to the *Decretum* until the second recension.[1] Two
first-recension *dicta ante* were modified in the second recension: 23
words were added to C.21 q.3 d.a.c.1, and 3 words were added to C.29 q.1
d.a.c.1.In total, only 202 words were added to the *dicta ante* in the
second recension. Thus, the *dicta ante* in Part II, like the case
statements, are quite stable, displaying very little change between the
first and second recension.

[1] **Confirm**. If these questions are missing altogether in the first
recension, what is the relationship to the questions as stated in the
initial case statement?

<div align="center">
<a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/"><img alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0" src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-nd/4.0/88x31.png" /></a><br />This work is licensed under a <a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/">Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License</a>.
</div>
