The *Decretum* represents a towering intellectual achievement of the
renaissance of the twelfth century that ushered in the high middle ages
in Europe. But whose achievement was it? In particular, is the
*Decretum* the achievement of a single author or was it the product of
serial or even collaborative authorship? Because so little is reliably
known about the historical Gratian, and because almost everything that
previous generations thought was known about Gratian has proved, on
closer examination, to be myth,[1] it is best to make our first approach
(*accessus*) to the author through his text.[2] The approach is made
more difficult by the fact that, like many modern university textbooks,
the *Decretum* underwent at least one major revision and was probably
the product of a process of continuous revision.

In 1996, Anders Winroth discovered that four surviving twelfth-century
manuscripts---Florence, Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale, Conv. Soppr. A.
1.402 (Fd); Barcelona, Arxiu de la Corona d'Aragó, Santa Maria de Ripoll
78 (Bc); Paris, Bibliothèque Nationale de France, nouvelles acquisitions
latines 1761 (P); and Admont, Stiftsbibliothek 23 and 43 (Aa)---preserve
the text of what Winroth called the first recension of the
*Decretum*.[3] In 1998, Carlos Larrainzar identified Paris, Bibliothèque
Nationale de France, latin 3884 I, fo. 1 (Pfr) as a one-page fragment of
a first-recension manuscript of the *Decretum*.[4] In 2011, Atria Larson
discovered that München, Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, lat. 22272 (Mw)
contains an abbreviation of the first recension of the *Decretum*.[5]
The four first-recension manuscripts Aa, Bc, Fd, and P were previously
thought to have been abbreviations and are by one imperfect but
frequently-invoked metric about half the length of the vulgate
*Decretum*, 1,860 as opposed to 3,945 canons.[6]

Winroth's discovery of the first recension suggests one obvious way in
which it might be problematic to refer simplistically to Gratian as the
author of the *Decretum,* as I have done thus far. Winroth rejects any
presumption of monolithic authorship on stratigraphic grounds. He argues
that the first recension is "coherent and complete" and that its author
intentionally released it into circulation as a "finished product."[7]
(In other words, it did not just prematurely escape into the wild like
parts of Augustine's *de Trinitate*.) Winroth thinks of the first and
second recensions as distinct textual layers and argues that two
different authors, Gratian 1 and Gratian 2, compiled the two
recensions.[8]

Several decades before Winroth discovered the first recension of the
Decretum and argued that the Gratian of the first recension was not the
same as the Gratian of the second recension, John Noonan pointed out
another obvious way in which it might be problematic to conceptualize
the *Decretum* as the product of monolithic authorship. As was noted
briefly above and will be discussed in further detail below, the second
recension of the *Decretum* had three distinct parts. Noonan warned that
the Gratian of Part I was not necessarily the same as the Gratian of
Part II or Part III. (And in point of fact, the Gratian of Part III, the
compiler of the treatise on the sacraments *de Consecratione*, is very
unlikely to have been the same as the Gratian of Parts I and II since it
was such a late addition to the *Decretum*.) Furthermore, nothing
logically excludes the possibility that Winroth and Noonan are both
right and that the Gratian of the first-recension of Part I is not
necessarily the same as the Gratian of the second-recension of Part I,
and so on.[9]

The *Decretum* says nothing about its own authorship. Twelfth-century
readers, however, implicitly endorsed the single-author theory by
subsuming the entire text of the vulgate *Decretum* under the eponym
"Gratian". The *Decretum*, however, like many other scholastic texts,
contains far more quoted than original material. Medieval opinion was
therefore divided not on the question of whether the *Decretum* had a
single author, but rather on the question of whether the creator of the
*Decretum* and creators of similar texts ought properly to be considered
authors at all. Stephen of Tournai in the preface to his *Summa* on the
*Decretum* insists that Gratian is its compiler, not its author:

> I should properly say that Gratian is the compiler of this work, not
> the author, for he brought together in this volume---that is, he
> arranged---rulings enacted by the holy Fathers. He was not their
> author or framer, unless perchance someone wishes to say that he is
> thus the author since he offered on his own in his dicta many things
> for clarifying and explicating the opinions of the holy
> \[Fathers\].[10]

Bonaventure (†1274) indirectly advocates for the opposite opinion in the
preface to his commentary on the *Sentences* of Peter Lombard. He asks
"what is the efficient cause or author of this book?", and answers that
"Peter Lombard, bishop of Paris, is the author of this book."
Bonaventure then notes that "the mode of authorship is four-fold", and
distinguishes the roles of *scriptor*, *compilator*, *commentator*, and
*auctor*, on the basis of the use they make of "the words of other men"
(*aliena*) and their own (*sua*):

> Someone else writes the words of other men and also of his own, but
> with his own forming the principle part and those of others being
> annexed merely by way of confirmation, and such a person should be
> called an author \[*auctor*\].[11]

He therefore concludes that:

> Such was the Master \[Peter Lombard\], who put forward \[*ponit*\] his
> own opinions, and confirmed \[them\] from the opinions of the Fathers.
> Whence he truly ought to be called the author of this book.[12]

Although Bonaventure's question is stated in the fashionable terms of
thirteenth-century Aristotelian scholastic jargon about causation, his
answer that Peter Lombard can be considered the author of the
*Sentences* can be transferred directly to Gratian and the *Decretum*:
by the logic of Bonaventure's argument, Gratian ought to be considered
the author of the *Decretum*.

Gratian was working within a well-established genre of academic writing
in medieval Latin literature, the canonical collection.[13] The
*Decretum* followed in the footsteps of any number of systematic
canonical collections that had been in circulation since the beginning
of the eleventh century in which the material was organized by
topic.[14]

Twelfth-century readers of a canonical collection did not necessarily
expect its compiler to have written all (or even any) of the words they
read. They expected instead to find the distinctive contribution of the
compiler in the selection, editing, and arrangement of texts not his
own: canons of councils, decrees of popes, and extracts from patristic
authorities and secular law, often accompanied by traditional
inscriptions ascribing the texts (accurately or inaccurately) to
recognized authoritative sources. Gratian met this expectation. Around
seventy percent of the text of the vulgate *Decretum* comes from the
tradition of canonical texts accumulated over the first millennium of
the church's history.[15] An extremely important part of the authorial
activity of Gratian, then, did consist in the collection and selection
of material from the canonical tradition and in his presentation and
organization of the texts that he had collected and selected.

If the author of a canonical collection had anything to say on his own
authority, he was expected to do so in a prologue. The Prologue of Ivo
of Chartres, for example, was a work of considerable theoretical
sophistication that continued to circulate independently and find an
audience even after Gratian's *Decretum* superseded the collections to
which it had originally been prepended.[16] Insofar as he did not
provide a preface for the *Decretum*, Gratian failed to meet this
particular expectation of the genre, something that did not escape the
notice of contemporaries like the author of the *Summa Parisiensis*.[17]

In presenting and organizing the canonical texts that he had selected,
however, Gratian added a significant amount of first-person commentary
(*dicta*), amounting to around twenty percent of the vulgate
*Decretum*.[18] Gratian's commentary is what binds the *Decretum*
together into a coherent whole, and his *dicta* form the backbone of the
arguments that he makes. The *dicta* (sayings) are a feature that
Gratian borrowed from another genre, the theological treatise,
specifically Alger of Liège's *De misericordia et iustitia*. In addition
to the *dicta*, Gratian also wrote the rubrics, so-called because they
were written in red ink in manuscripts of the *Decretum*. The rubrics
are one-line summaries of canons that they introduce.

As a first-order approximation, then, Gratian can be considered the
author, in the modern sense of the word, of the *dicta* and rubrics, and
the compiler and arranger of the canons and inscriptions. (In practice,
*dicta*, inscriptions, and rubrics cannot be distinguished quite so
cleanly as we would like: dicta sometimes trail off into inscriptions,
and rubrics and inscriptions are sometimes poorly separated, especially
in *de Penitentia*.) But, as Noonan further pointed out, the Gratian who
compiled, arranged, and edited the canons and inscriptions was not
necessarily the same as the person who wrote the *dicta*, who in turn
was not necessarily the same as the person who created the rubrics.[19]
All of these considerations suggest that the presumption that the
*Decretum* was the product of a single author ought to be entertained
with extreme caution. As I turn my attention to the collection and
selection, presentation, and organization of the canonical texts found
in the *Decretum*, I will continue to use the name Gratian as a
conventional label for its author or authors, while withholding judgment
as to whether one person or many stand behind the name.

## Collection and Selection

A canon is an authoritative text that provides a rule or norm for
Christian life, either for individual Christian believers in their
clerical or lay station or for the Church corporately at whatever
level---local church or religious foundation, diocese, province, or the
universal Church. The Greek work *kanon* literally means a ruler or
straightedge used to mark a line, and Christian believers individually
and the Church corporately follow a straight path when they follow the
rules marked out by the *kanones*. "*Canon grece, latine regula
nuncupatur. Regula dicta est eo quod recte ducit, nec aliquando aliorsum
trahit. Alii dixerunt regulam dictam, vel quod regat, vel normam recte
vivendi prebeat, vel quod distortum pravumque est corrigat.* ('Canon' is
Greek for what is called a 'rule' in Latin. It is called a rule because
it leads one aright and never takes one astray. But others say that it
is called a rule because it rules, presents a norm for right living, or
sets aright what is twisted and bent.)"[20] The late first- or early
second-century *Didache* is an example of a very early Christian text
that contains such rules or norms. After the official recognition of
Christianity by Constantine in 313, the Church had a greater need for an
agreed-upon set of rules. Such rules were provided by the canons of
provincial and ecumenical councils, and somewhat later by papal
decretals.

Gratian defines canons as either *decreta Pontificum* ("decrees of
pontiffs") or *statuta conciliorum* ("statutes of councils").[21] From a
relatively early date, the bishops of Rome had cultivated the practice
of issuing decretal letters, consciously modeled after Roman imperial
rescripts, in which they laid down disciplinary and doctrinal norms in
response to questions put to them, usually by other bishops.[22] The
earliest surviving example is a letter from Pope Siricius (†399) to
Bishop Himerius of Tarragona, written in 385 in response to a letter
that Himerius had sent to Siricius's predecessor, Pope Damasus
(†384).[23] The letter, sometimes referred to by the first word of its
text as the *Directa* decretal, remains an important source for norms
concerning clerical celibacy in late antiquity. For modern readers, the
most familiar example of an imperial rescript, the genre after which the
papal decretal letter was modeled, is the early second-century (ca. 112)
response of the emperor Trajan (†117) to a letter from Pliny the Younger
inquiring as to how Pliny, then Roman provincial governor of Bithynia
and Pontus, ought to proceed against those accused of being Christians.

Another extremely important source for the *Decretum* is canons from the
ecumenical councils and from historically important provincial synods:
*Conciliorum vero alia sunt universalia, alia provincialia*. ("Some
councils are universal, others provincial.")[24] Although the Council of
Nicaea (325) is primarily remembered for its doctrinal settlement,
memorialized in the Nicene Creed, of the Arian controversy over the
divine nature of Christ, it also promulgated twenty canons of a
disciplinary nature. Provincial synods tended to assume an outsized
importance in the canonical tradition when figures such as Augustine of
Hippo (†430) or Caesarius of Arles (†542) either participated in or
presided over them: "*Etiam S. Augustinus Yponensis episcopus in eadem
sinodo legitur fuisse."* (It is read that St. Augustine, bishop of
Hippo, also attended this synod.)"[25] By the time the *Decretum* was
compiled, the cumulative output of the ecumenical councils and
provincial synods amounted to a considerable mass of material, and
Gratian devoted most of *Distinctiones* 15 and 16 to enumerating the
canonically authoritative councils and synods.

In addition to textual material strictly defined as canons ("decrees of
pontiffs" and "statutes of councils"), Gratian drew on other sources
which, if not canons according to the narrower technical definition,
could be treated as authoritative in a more general sense. The most
important of these *auctoritates* were drawn from the writings of major
patristic figures such as Ambrose (†397), Jerome (†419 or 420),
Augustine (†430), and Gregory (†604), whom later generations considered
doctors of the church.[26] It is easy to see how works such as Ambrose
of Milan's *De officiis* ("On duties")---a Christian answer to the work
of Cicero with the same title---could be a rich source of norms. Gratian
provides an explicit list of "the works of the holy fathers that are
received in the Catholic Church."[27] (It is necessary to distinguish
the papal from the patristic when dealing with figures like Gregory.
While textual excerpts from the letters found in the registers of
Gregory clearly derive their authority from the fact that Gregory was
pope, a text like the *Moralia in Job* has an authority to a large
extent independent of the formal ecclesiastical office Gregory
held.)[28]

Finally, in addition to excerpts from works of patristic authors,
another source for extra-canonical authorities was secular law,
primarily (pre-Justinianic) Roman law but also including the capitulary
legislation of the more important Carolingian emperors ---Charlemagne
(†814), Louis the Pious (†840), and Charles the Bald (†877)---and their
successors.

Up to this point, I have been implicitly referring to Gratian's material
sources, texts such as the *Letters* of Gregory I or the *de Officiis*
of St Ambrose from which the canons in the *Decretum* were ultimately
derived. And in a small number of cases, Gratian did work directly with
material sources. Isidore of Seville's *Etymologies* is an example of a
text from which Gratian probably collected excerpts directly from the
material source. It is also possible that he collected excerpts directly
from Gregory the Great's *Moralia in Job*. But Gratian drew the
overwhelming majority of the canons he compiled in the *Decretum* from
formal sources, predecessor collections containing patristic, conciliar,
and papal (as well as pseudo-papal) authorities, predigested into
canon-sized units of text.

Peter Landau has suggested that Gratian relied primarily on just five
formal sources in writing the Decretum: Anselm of Lucca's *Collectio
canonum*, the pseudo-Ivonian *Collectio Tripartita*, Ivo of Chartes's
*Panormia*, Gregory of San Grisogono's *Polycarpus*, and an anonymous
*Collection in Three Books* (*3L*).[29] This hypothesis is not
universally accepted: Pennington, for example, believes that Gratian may
have also relied on one or more now-lost Central Italian collections
similar to the *Collection in Nine Books* (*9L*).[30]

By the end of the Patristic period, the canons of the ecumenical and of
historically important provincial councils constituted a substantial
body of canon law, which were gathered into collections such as the
*Collectio Dionysiana* (ca. 500). A later revision of the *Dionysiana*,
the *Collectio Dionysio-Hadriana* (774), exercised enormous influence on
the transmission of canon law to the Carolingian world and through it to
medieval Western Europe.

Collectors like Dionysius Exiguus (†ca. 540), the original compiler of
the *Collectio Dionysiana*, located all authority in the distant past.
This attitude prevailed throughout the period during which the canonical
sources later used by Gratian were being compiled. Law, however,
ultimately has to correspond with and respond to the needs of
contemporary society, and by the ninth century the Church, especially
north of the Alps, was operating in a very different political and
social environment from that of the Mediterranean world of late
antiquity, which had produced the sources for Dionysius's collection.
When faced with the need for new law to cope with new circumstances,
some enterprising Carolingian churchmen took more recent
material---mostly canons from provincial synods---and repackaged them,
attributing them to popes from the first century through Gregory I
(†604). The compilers of these collections are usually referred to as
"forgers," a convention I will observe in the following discussion, but
they were not simply inventing their sources. Most of the material in
the collections was genuine but of relatively recent origin---the goal
of the forgers was simply to retroject it far enough into the past to
meet the standard they set for authoritativeness.

In order to understand the intent of the forgers, one has to understand
the immediate political situation to which they were reacting.
Charlemagne's son and successor, Emperor Louis the Pious (†840), was
dethroned by three of his sons in a ceremony of public penance in 833.
When Louis was unexpectedly restored less than six months later, he
moved quickly to depose many of the bishops who had participated in
imposing the penance on him, starting with Ebbo, archbishop of
Rheims.[31] The forgers wanted to protect bishops from being deprived of
office by emperor, king, or metropolitan. They did this by building up
the pope as the only superior who could judge a bishop. This was
convenient, because while popes in the ninth century had considerable
moral authority north of the Alps, they had little real power. The
intent of the forgers' program therefore was to render bishops
effectively impervious to judgment. The collections that resulted from
this effort, the so-called Pseudo-Isidorian *Decretals* and *Benedictus
Levita*, were accepted everywhere as genuine in an age lacking any
serious historical-critical awareness, and they survived to become
important sources for canonical collectors in the eleventh century.[32]
Many of these forged canons eventually found their way into Gratian's
*Decretum*.

The reform papacy that reached its apogee with the pontificate of
Hildebrand, who reigned as Gregory VII from 1073 to 1085, provided a new
impetus for the collection and study of canons. The special concerns of
the Gregorian reformers also shaped their approach to the collection and
presentation of canons. The consuming interest of the reform generation
was the relationship between *regnum* and *sacerdotium* (church and
state). This interest in the problem of church-state relations was
instrumental: the ultimate concern of the eleventh-century reformers, as
it had been for their eighth- and ninth-century Carolingian
predecessors, was for the reform and renewal of monastic and clerical
life. Unlike the Carolingians, however, who had thought that cooperation
between ecclesiastical and secular authorities was essential for the
reform of religious life, the eleventh-century reformers believed that
secular rulers had to acknowledge the jurisdictional supremacy of the
papacy and the independence of the church from lay interference as a
necessary precondition for effective clerical and monastic reform. It is
significant that the most important canon law collections of the reform
period were compiled by prelates sympathetic with the reform movement,
such as Anselm, bishop of Lucca (†1086), compiler of the *Collectio
canonum*; Gregory, cardinal of San Grisogono (†1113), compiler of the
*Polycarpus*; and Ivo, bishop of Chartres (†1115), compiler of the
*Panormia*. Burchard of Worms (†1025) was a forerunner of this group.
Although he died before the reform papacy or the investiture
controversy, his *Decretum* has more in common with collections compiled
during that period, insofar as it is systematic and reflects concerns
similar to those of his successors.

Unsurprisingly, given their concern with asserting the jurisdictional
supremacy of the papacy and the independence of the church from lay
interference, the eleventh-century collectors showed considerable
interest in the forged decretals of the ninth century. For example, 252
of the 315 chapters of the anonymous *Collection in 74 Titles* (ca.
1050) are drawn from the Pseudo-Isidorian *Decretals*.[33]

The program of the Gregorian reformers collided with two practical
realities of eleventh-century life. Abbotts and bishops were large
landowners and therefore important vassals of secular rulers.
Furthermore, secular rulers were almost completely dependent on the
Church for administrative personnel until the rise of university
faculties of Roman law in the twelfth century. It was therefore
essential from the point of view of secular rulers that they should be
able to control appointments to key benefices in order to ensure the
loyalty of their holders. The controversy over this issue dominated
papal-imperial relations for half a century. It was finally resolved by
the Concordat of Worms (1122), which provided that key benefices were to
be filled through regular canonical processes free from lay interference
(such as election by a cathedral chapter) but that the benefice holder
should swear fealty to the secular ruler for his fiefs.

Gratian depended on a relatively small number of eleventh- and early
twelfth-century systematic canonical collections, his formal sources,
and those predecessor collections, in turn, depended on an older stratum
of mostly chronologically arranged canonical collections. Gratian was
thus selecting from a body of canonical material that had already passed
through a fairly rigorous filtering process, and two of the most
important filters---the ninth-century pseudo-Isidorian forgers and the
eleventh-century Gregorian reformers---had had extremely strong
ideological orientations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Presentation

Having considered how Gratian sourced and collected his materials---the
question of what canons are and where Gratian got them---we now turn to
the question of how Gratian presented and organized the canons he had
collected. Here, it is important to distinguish between presentation,
the small-grain or micro structure of the *Decretum*, and organization,
the large-grain or macro structure of the *Decretum*. The organization
of the *Decretum* is very regular, so structurally regular, in fact,
that Reuter and Silagi's OCP e-text of the Friedberg edition can be
taken apart using a recursive descent parser[34] and should be thought
of as a sequence of hierarchically nested containers. Taking a bottom-up
approach, we will first consider the presentation or small-grain
structure, and start with chapters (*capitula*), atomic containers out
of which the higher-order containers in the *Decretum*---parts,
distinctions, cases, and questions---are constructed.

Chapters in Parts I and II of the *Decretum* typically consist of an
inscription, a rubric, a canon text, and a *dictum post canonem*,
literally meaning "something said after the canon" and usually
abbreviated d.p.c. There are almost no *dicta post canones* in Part III,
which is in this respect much more similar to the formal source
collections Gratian relied on than to the rest of the *Decretum*.[35]
The discussion that follows focuses on inscriptions, rubrics, and *dicta
post canones*; canon texts have been discussed in the section above on
the collection and selection of canons, and nothing further need be
added here.

Most canons have an inscription, which identifies the ultimate source of
authority for that canon, usually a papal decretal, a canon from an
ecumenical council or an important provincial synod, or a patristic
text.[36] Because Gratian collected his texts almost exclusively from
formal sources, rather than material sources like the register of Pope
Gregory I,[37] the inscription affixed to a canon was sometimes
historically inaccurate, especially if the text in question was one
derived from the Pseudo-Isidorian collections.

Canons are often, though not always, introduced by a rubric. The name
refers to the fact that rubrics were conventionally written in red
(*ruber*) ink in manuscripts. A rubric is a very short summary of what
the following canon is about. In many cases the rubric simply reads "*de
eodem*", which means "about the same thing" as the preceding canon. The
137 *de eodem* rubrics introducing first-recension canons turn out to be
important clues into the development of the text of the *Decretum*.[38]
Stephan Kuttner observed in 1984 that "in the course its composition the
material outgrew the original plan so that many untidy seams of the
texture remain visible."[39] Canons that are introduced by *de eodem*
rubrics but that are clearly not "about the same thing" as the preceding
canon in the vulgate *Decretum* are notable instances of visibly "untidy
seams". One of Winroth's strongest arguments that the Aa, Bc, Fd, and P
manuscripts represent a first recension rather than an abbreviation of
the *Decretum* is that otherwise problematic *de eodem* rubrics make
sense in the sequential order in which canons appear in those
manuscripts (e.g., the *de eodem* rubric for C.24 q.3 c.5 refers back to
C.24 q.3 c.2, which it consecutively follows in the first
recension).[40]

Eichbauer and Pennington believe that Gratian wrote the rubrics in the
*Decretum* rather than reusing those he found in formal source
collections.[41] The rubrics are far too short to be of value for the
purpose of authorship attribution. On the other hand, the fact that they
are believed to have been written by Gratian, and therefore reflect his
choice of wording, means that they could potentially be useful evidence
in the search for new topics introduced between the first and second
recensions.

Chapters in the formal sources from which Gratian selected his material
typically included an inscription, a rubric, and a canon text. Gratian
added a *dictum post canonem* containing his own commentary on the
preceding canon or series of canons, a feature he borrowed from Alger of
Liège's theological treatise *De misericordia et iustitia* but without
immediate precedent in the canonical literature.[42] The *dicta post
canones* are statements that Gratian made on his own authority as a
jurist, carry the thread of his argument, and do his interpretive work.
The *dicta* are texts that Gratian (whether we think of him as one
person or many) actually wrote, and are therefore subject to analysis
for authorship attribution. "The *dicta* in Gratian's *Decretum* bring
the reader closer to its author than any other part of the text."[43]

## Organization

We now turn our attention from the chapters, the lower-order containers
that provide the small-grain organization or micro structure of the
*Decretum* to the parts, distinctions, cases and questions. These
higher-order containers, constructed out of chapters, provide the
large-grain organization or macro structure of the *Decretum*.

### Parts

The *Decretum* in the form that circulated after around 1150 (the Köln
Dombibliothek manuscripts 127 and 128 are good early examples) has three
parts. Contemporaries like Rufinus and Stephen of Tournai understood the
three parts to treat respectively of ministries, business, and
sacraments: "*primam ministeriis, secundam negotiis, tertiam
ecclesiasticis deputat sacramentis.*"[44]

The first part was originally written as a collection of treatises
(*tractatus*) but is divided into 101 distinctions in the vulgate
*Decretum*. The division of Part I into distinctions is traditionally
thought to have been made by Paucapalea (fl. 1140s) rather than by
Gratian.[45] The division seems to have taken some time to reach its
final form: Pennington has pointed out that there were 99-distinction
versions of the first recension,[46] and Rufinus writing in the
mid-1160s presumably about the second recension describes Part I as
"having been completed in one hundred distinctions."[47]

Modern scholarship conventionally divides Part I into a treatise on laws
(*tractatus de legibus*) corresponding to distinctions 1-20,[48] a
treatise of those in holy orders (*tractatus ordinandorum*)
corresponding to distinctions 21-80,[49] and an epilogue to the
*tractatus ordinandorum* corresponding to distinctions 81-101.[50] The
treatises seem to have started out short and tightly focused and only
later to have coalesced into the larger units: a first-recension
*dictum* in Part II makes reference to a treatise of decretal letters
(*tractatus decretalium epistolarum*) apparently corresponding to
distinctions 19-20 specifically rather than to the *tractatus de
legibus* generally.[51]

The second part consists of 36 cases, which are further subdivided into
168 questions. Four of the questions, C.11 q.2, C.17 q.3, C.22 q.3, and
C.29 q.1 are empty, meaning that they contain no chapters.[52] C.33 q.3,
encapsulates a treatise on penance (*de Penitentia*, abbreviated *de
Pen.*) *De Penitentia* is structurally similar to Part I, and is divided
into seven distinctions. Certain sequences of cases in Part II comprise
thematic groups, notably simony (case 1), procedure (cases 2-6),
monastic life (cases 16-20), heresy (cases 23-26), and marriage (cases
27-36).[53]

The third part of the *Decretum* is a treatise on sacraments (*de
Consecratione*, abbreviated *de Cons.*) divided into five
distinctions.[54] That *de Consecratione* is a very late addition to the
*Decretum* is not in doubt---it is absent from all first-recension
manuscripts, nor was it included in the earliest manuscripts of the more
widely-circulated second-recension version, as indicated by glosses
found in the Gt, Pf, and Tr manuscripts describing Gratian's work as
"principally divided into two parts."[55]

### Distinctions

Parts are internal nodes that contain only other internal nodes
(distinctions and cases). Chapters are internal nodes that contain only
terminal or leaf nodes (inscriptions, rubrics, canons, and *dicta post
canones*). The remaining types of containers, distinctions, cases, and
questions, contain both terminal or leaf nodes (*dicta ante canones* and
*dicta initialia* or *themata*) and internal nodes (cases contain
questions, distinctions and questions contain chapters).

Distinctions are the highest-order containers in Part I, *de Pen*., and
Part III. They contain a single terminal node (the *dictum ante*),
followed by an ordered sequence of one or more internal nodes (the
chapters) containing inscription, rubric, canon and *dictum post*
terminal nodes.[56]

### Cases

Cases (*causae*) are the highest-order containers in the second part of
the *Decretum*. Each of the 36 cases in Part II is introduced by a
hypothetical case statement (*thema* or *dictum initiale*,
conventionally abbreviated d.init.). The case statements are a subset of
the *dicta* that are found only in, and that are closely tied to the
organization of, Part II. Medieval and modern scholarship agree in
accepting the *dicta initialia*, like the *dicta ante* and *dicta post*,
as having been written by Gratian.[57] Cases contain a single terminal
or leaf node (the *dictum initiale*) followed by an ordered sequence of
one or more internal nodes, the questions, which in turn contain
chapters. The depth of Part II, considered as a tree-structured document
composed of nested containers, is one greater than the depth of Parts I
and III.[58]

The case statements all follow a very regular formal pattern. They are
introduced by a hypothetical narrative that is followed by an
enumeration of the questions that Gratian wants to investigate. C.27
d.init. (chosen for this purpose because it is the shortest case
statement) demonstrates the pattern:

> *Quidam uotum castitatis habens desponsauit sibi uxorem; illa priori
> condicioni renuncians, transtulit se ad alium, et nupsit illi; ille,
> cui prius desponsata fuerat, repetit eam. Hic primum queritur, an
> coniugium possit esse inter uouentes? Secundo, an liceat, sponsae a
> sponso recedere, et alii nubere?*[59] (A man having \[made\] a vow of
> chastity betrothed a wife to himself; she, renouncing her previous
> agreement, gave herself to another and married him; he to whom she had
> been first betrothed tried to get her back. Here it is first asked
> whether there is able to be a marriage between those vowing? Second,
> whether someone betrothed is allowed to abandon the person to whom
> they are betrothed and to marry another? \[trans. PLE\])

The transition between the narrative section and the enumeration of
questions is clearly signalled in each of the case statements by the use
of one of a small number of formulaic markers, of which *Hic primum
queritur* is the most common.[60]

The cases statements appear to have been in some sense lesson plans,
providing the outline for Gratian's classroom presentation of canonical
sources. As such, they were intended to be memorable rather than
realistic.

In D.28, d.init., for example, a married infidel, by which Gratian means
a Muslim, converts to Christianity. As a result, his wife separates from
him out of hatred for his new faith. The convert then takes a new
Christian wife, and after she dies, he is made a priest. Finally, "on
account of the merit of his life and learning," he is elected bishop.
Gratian extracts from this fantastical fact-pattern a series of
questions significant from a legal point of view: whether there can be
marriage between infidels, whether there is ever a situation in which a
man can take another wife if his previous wife is still alive, and
whether someone who had one wife before he was baptized and another wife
after he was baptized should be considered a bigamist.

Some case statements, however, reflect an outlook and a set of concerns
that Gratian's benefice-seeking students probably understood as
realistic, and that university-educated urban professionals of the
present day might not find difficult to identify with. At a time when
considerable attention is being paid in the realm of popular discourse
(if not yet public policy) to the issue of "opportunity hoarding" on
behalf of upper- and upper-middle class children by their
university-educated, urban professional parents, the intense concern of
"a certain man" in the first case statement to secure a good
ecclesiastical career for his son (and his willingness to resort more
than once to bribery in order to realize that objective) has a
distinctly contemporary feel to it.[61]

**The key finding of the dissertation is that the case statements were
written by someone other than the author(s) of the first-recension
*dicta*.**

# Bibliography

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div id="ref-beyer_lokale_1998" class="csl-entry">

Beyer, Alfred. *Lokale Abbreviationen des Decretum Gratiani: Analyse und
Vergleich der Dekretabbreviationen "Omnes leges aut divine" (Bamberg),
"Humanum genus duobus regitur" (Pommersfelden) und "De his qui intra
claustra monasterii consistunt" (Lichtenthal, Baden-Baden)*. Bamberger
theologische Studien ; Bd. 6. Frankfurt am Main ; PLang, 1998.

</div>

<div id="ref-bonaventure_commentaria_1882" class="csl-entry">

Bonaventure. *Commentaria in Quatuor Libros Sententiarum Magistri Petri
Lombardi*. Vol. 1. Doctoris Seraphici S. Bonaventurae S. R. E. Episcopi
Cardinalis Opera Omnia. Ad Claras Aquas (Quaracchi): Ex Typographia
Collegii S. Bonaventurae, 1882.

</div>

<div id="ref-brasington_ways_2004" class="csl-entry">

Brasington, Bruce Clark, ed. *Ways of Mercy: The Prologue of Ivo of
Chartres ; Edition and Analysis*. Vita Regularis, Bd. 2. Münster :
Piscataway, N.J: LIT ; Distributed in North America by Transaction
Publishers, 2004.

</div>

<div id="ref-chodorow_ecclesiology_1972" class="csl-entry">

Chodorow, Stanley. *Christian Political Theory and Church Politics in
the Mid-Twelfth Century; the Ecclesiology of Gratian’s Decretum*.
Publications of the Center for Medieval and Renaissance Studies,
U.C.L.A., 5. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972.

</div>

<div id="ref-de_jong_penitential_2009" class="csl-entry">

De Jong, Mayke. *The Penitential State: Authority and Atonement in the
Age of Louis the Pious, 814-840*. Cambridge, UK ; New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2009.

</div>

<div id="ref-eichbauer_redactions_2007" class="csl-entry">

Eichbauer, Melodie Harris. “St. Gall Stiftsbibliothek 673 and the Early
Redactions of Gratian’s Decretum.” *Bulletin of Medieval Canon Law* 27
(2007): 105–39.

</div>

<div id="ref-fowler-magerl_clavis_2005" class="csl-entry">

Fowler-Magerl, Linda. *Clavis Canonum: Selected Canon Law Collections
Before 1140: Access with Data Processing*. Monumenta Germaniae
Historica. Hilfsmittel 21. Hannover: Hahnsche, 2005.

</div>

<div id="ref-fuhrmann_einfluss_1972" class="csl-entry">

Fuhrmann, Horst. *Einfluß und Verbreitung der pseudoisidorischen
Fälschungen : von ihrem Auftauchen bis in d. neuere Zeit*. Schriften der
Monumenta Germaniae historica, Deutsches Institut für Erforschung des
Mittelalters ; Bd. 24. Stuttgart: Hiersemann, 1972.

</div>

<div id="ref-fuhrmann_pseudo-isidorian_2001" class="csl-entry">

———. “The Pseudo-Isidorian Forgeries.” In *Papal Letters in the Early
Middle Ages*, edited by Detlev Jasper and Horst Fuhrmann, 137–95.
History of Medieval Canon Law. Washington, D.C.: Catholic University of
America Press, 2001.

</div>

<div id="ref-gilchrist_collection_1980" class="csl-entry">

Gilchrist, J. T., ed. *The Collection in Seventy-Four Titles: A Canon
Law Manual of the Gregorian Reform*. Mediaeval Sources in Translation
22. Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1980.

</div>

<div id="ref-hinschius_decretales_1963" class="csl-entry">

Hinschius, Paul, ed. *Decretales pseudo-Isidorianae, et, Capitula
Angilramni: ad fidem librorum manuscriptorum recensuit, fontes
indicavit, commentationem de collectione pseudo-Isidori praemisit*.
Aalen: Scientia Verlag, 1963.

</div>

<div id="ref-jaffe_regesta_1956" class="csl-entry">

Jaffé, Philipp, ed. *Regesta pontificum romanorum*. 2nd ed. Vol. 1.
Graz: Akademische Druck, 1956.

</div>

<div id="ref-kalb_studien_1983" class="csl-entry">

Kalb, Herbert. *Studien zur Summa Stephans von Tournai: ein Beitrag zur
kanonistischen Wissenschaftsgeschichte des späten 12. Jahrhunderts*.
Forschungen zur Rechts- und Kulturgeschichte, Bd. 12. Innsbruck:
Universitätsverlag Wagner, 1983.

</div>

<div id="ref-kraebel_modes_2019" class="csl-entry">

Kraebel, Andrew. “Modes of Authorship and the Making of Medieval English
Literature.” In *The Cambridge Handbook of Literary Authorship*, edited
by Ingo Berensmeyer, Gert Buelens, and Marysa Demoor, 98–114. Cambridge,
United Kingdom ; Cambridge University Press, 2019.

</div>

<div id="ref-kretzschmar_alger_1985" class="csl-entry">

Kretzschmar, Robert. *Alger von Lüttichs Traktat "De misericordia et
iustitia": ein kanonistischer Konkordanzversuch aus der Zeit des
Investiturstreits: Untersuchungen und Edition*. Quellen und Forschungen
zum Recht im Mittalter, Bd. 2. Sigmaringen: J. Thorbecke, 1985.

</div>

<div id="ref-kuttner_research_1990" class="csl-entry">

Kuttner, Stephan. “Research on Gratian: Acta and Agenda.” In *Studies in
the History of Medieval Canon Law*. Collected Studies CS325. Aldershot,
Hampshire, Great Britain : Brookfield, Vt., USA: Variorum ; Gower, 1990.

</div>

<div id="ref-landau_gratian_2008" class="csl-entry">

Landau, Peter. “Gratian and the Decretum Gratiani.” In *The History of
Medieval Canon Law in the Classical Period, 1140-1234: From Gratian to
the Decretals of Pope Gregory IX*, edited by Wilfried Hartmann and
Kenneth Pennington, 22–54. History of Medieval Canon Law. Washington,
D.C: Catholic University of America Press, 2008.

</div>

<div id="ref-landau_arbeitsplan_1994" class="csl-entry">

———. “Gratians Arbeitsplan.” In *Iuri Canonico Promovendo: Festschrift
für Heribert Schmitz Zum 65. Geburtstag*, edited by Winfried Aymans and
Karl-Theodor Geringer, 691–707. Regensburg: F. Pustet, 1994.

</div>

<div id="ref-larson_abbreviatio_2011" class="csl-entry">

Larson, Atria A. “An Abbreviatio of the First Recension of Gratian’s
Decretum in Munich?” *Bulletin of Medieval Canon Law* 29 (2011): 51–118.

</div>

<div id="ref-larson_master_2014" class="csl-entry">

———. *Master of Penance: Gratian and the Development of Penitential
Thought and Law in the Twelfth Century*. Studies in Medieval and Early
Modern Canon Law, volume 11. Washington, D.C: The Catholic University of
America Press, 2014.

</div>

<div id="ref-markus_gregory_1997" class="csl-entry">

Markus, R. A. *Gregory the Great and His World*. Cambridge ; New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1997.

</div>

<div id="ref-mclaughlin_summa_1952" class="csl-entry">

McLaughlin, Terence P., ed. *The Summa Parisiensis on the Decretum
Gratiani*. Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1952.

</div>

<div id="ref-noonan_gratian_1979" class="csl-entry">

Noonan, John T. “Gratian Slept Here: The Changing Identity of the Father
of the Systematic Study of Canon Law.” *Traditio* 35 (January 1979):
145–72.

</div>

<div id="ref-pennington_biography_2018" class="csl-entry">

Pennington, Kenneth. “The Biography of Gratian, the Father of Canon
Law.” In *A Service Beyond All Recompense*, edited by Kurt Martens,
359–92. Catholic University of America Press, 2018.

</div>

<div id="ref-schulte_summa_1965" class="csl-entry">

Schulte, Johann Friedrich, ed. *Die summa über das Decretum Gratiani*.
Aalen: Scientia Verlag, 1965.

</div>

<div id="ref-singer_summa_1963" class="csl-entry">

Singer, Heinrich. *Summa Decretorum*. Aalen : Paderborn: Scientia Verlag
; F. Schöningh, 1963.

</div>

<div id="ref-somerville_prefaces_1998" class="csl-entry">

Somerville, Robert, and Bruce Clark Brasington, eds. *Prefaces to Canon
Law Books in Latin Christianity: Selected Translations, 500-1245*. New
Haven, Conn: Yale University Press, 1998.

</div>

<div id="ref-vetulani_gratien_1990" class="csl-entry">

Vetulani, Adam. *Sur Gratien et les Décrétales*. Collected studies ;
CS308. Aldershot, Hampshire: Variorum, 1990.

</div>

<div id="ref-wei_gratian_2016" class="csl-entry">

Wei, John C. *Gratian the Theologian*. Studies in Medieval and Early
Modern Canon Law, Volume 13. Washington, D.C: Catholic University of
America Press, 2016.

</div>

<div id="ref-weigand_glossen_1991" class="csl-entry">

Weigand, Rudolf. *Die Glossen zum "Dekret" Gratians: Studien zu den
frühen Glossen und Glosskompositionen*. Studia Gratiana 25-26. Rome,
1991.

</div>

<div id="ref-winroth_making_2000" class="csl-entry">

Winroth, Anders. *The Making of Gratian’s Decretum*. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2000.

</div>

<div id="ref-winroth_uncovering_1997" class="csl-entry">

———. “Uncovering Gratian’s Original Decretum with the Help of Electronic
Resources.” *Columbia Library Columns* 46, no. 1 (1997): 26–31.

</div>

<div id="ref-zechiel-eckes_blick_2001" class="csl-entry">

Zechiel-Eckes, Klaus. “Ein Blick in Pseudoisidors Werkstatt. Studien zum
Entstehungsprozeß der falschen Dekretalen. Mit einem exemplarischen
editorischen Anhang (Pseudo-Julius an die orientalischen Bischöfe, JK
+196).” *Francia* 28, no. 1 (2001): 37–90.

</div>

</div>

[1] John T. Noonan, “Gratian Slept Here: The Changing Identity of the
Father of the Systematic Study of Canon Law,” *Traditio* 35 (January
1979): 145–72.

[2] "Given this lack of reliable extrinsic evidence, our best source of
evidence about Gratian is his book(s)." (John C. Wei, *Gratian the
Theologian*, Studies in Medieval and Early Modern Canon Law, Volume 13
(Washington, D.C: Catholic University of America Press, 2016), 33).

[3] Manuscripts of Gratian's *Decretum* are frequently referred to in
recent scholarly literature by two-letter abbreviations or *sigla*
derived from their shelfmarks. A reference to Sg (to use a particularly
controversial example) is much more compact and memorable than one to
Sankt Gallen, Stiftsbibliothek 673. Rudolf Weigand (†1998) generated the
original list of *sigla* in the course of his groundbreaking study of
early glossed manuscripts of the *Decretum*, (*Die Glossen zum "Dekret"
Gratians: Studien zu den frühen Glossen und Glosskompositionen*, Studia
Gratiana 25-26 (Rome, 1991)). In the context of Weigand's study early
means before 1216, when Johannes Teutonicus (†1245) finalized the
ordinary gloss, or standardized commentary, on the *Decretum*.
Manuscripts falling outside the original scope of Weigand's
investigation are now assigned *sigla* following the pattern he set. For
example, Paris, Bibliothèque Nationale de France, nouvelles acquisitions
latines 1761, although an extremely important and early (possible the
earliest) manuscript of the *Decretum*, was not glossed, and was
therefore not assigned a *siglum* by Weigand. On the advice of Weigand,
Winroth supplied the *siglum* P by which the manuscript is now commonly
identified: "it was Rudolf Weigand who came up with it. I had asked him
what siglum this ms should have, since I thought all of the two-letter
ones that started with a P had been taken. He said to use only P,
'because it is such an important manuscript'." (Anders Winroth email to
Paul Evans, October 1, 2018) (Although the *sigla* in Weigand's
*Handschriftenliste* adhere consistently to the two-letter convention,
some of the *sigla* supplied by other scholars deviate from it, e.g., P,
Pfr.)

[4] Anders Winroth, *The Making of Gratian’s Decretum* (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2000), 32.

[5] Atria A. Larson, “An Abbreviatio of the First Recension of Gratian’s
Decretum in Munich?” *Bulletin of Medieval Canon Law* 29 (2011): 51–118.

[6] "The second recension contains 3,945 canons (including the paleae)
in the editions. The first recension contains only 1,860 canons (47
percent)." (Winroth, *The Making of Gratian’s Decretum*, 122) The
division of distinctions and questions into canons is a matter of
editorial opinion and therefore unavoidably conventional. The
generally-cited number of 3,945 comes from Friedberg's introduction (edF
1.xii). Furthermore, many canons include more than one canon text, and
the conventional number obfuscates the distinction between the canon
defined as a container or package and the canon text or texts included
within it. The Reuter and Silagi e-text of the Friedberg edition has
3,848 canons (identified by the OCP `<4 N>` tag, where N is the canon
number) containing 4,394 distinct canon texts (identified by the OCP
`<T T>` tag). (Note: `egrep "<T T>.*<T T>" edF.txt` to find the three
lines where the canon text tag occurs twice on the same line.)

[7] "The first recension of the *Decretum* was not a living text. It was
a finished product which its author considered ready to be circulated.
This is evident from its text, which is as much a finished and polished
product as could be expected of any twelfth-century text. Further, it is
also evident from the fact that the first recension survives in one
version only; what differences there are among the manuscripts are all
minor (the apparent exception of Aa will be discussed below). They are
differences one would expect to find in any manuscript tradition,
arising from scribal mistake or ingenuity. In other words, the
manuscripts do not represent different stages in the development of the
text, in the manner of 'classically' living texts, such as the *Song of
Roland*, where each different manuscript version has an equally valid
claim to authenticity." (Winroth, 130).

[8] "In the interests of simplicity and clarity, I have therefore chosen
to call the author of the first recension Gratian 1 and the author of
the second recension Gratian 2. These labels are not intended to suggest
that Gratian 1 and Gratian 2 could not have been the same person."
(Winroth, 122) "It is impossible to draw any certain conclusions, but
the evidence presented in the last two chapters supports the view that
that two recensions had difference authors." (Winroth, 194–95).

[9] Excepting only that there is no first-recension version of Part III.

[10] Robert Somerville and Bruce Clark Brasington, eds., *Prefaces to
Canon Law Books in Latin Christianity: Selected Translations, 500-1245*
(New Haven, Conn: Yale University Press, 1998), 200-201. Somerville is
translating from Herbert Kalb, *Studien zur Summa Stephans von Tournai:
ein Beitrag zur kanonistischen Wissenschaftsgeschichte des späten 12.
Jahrhunderts*, Forschungen zur Rechts- und Kulturgeschichte, Bd. 12
(Innsbruck: Universitätsverlag Wagner, 1983), 113-120. "Compositorem
huius operis recte dixerim Gratianum, non auctorem. Capitula namque a
sanctis patribus edita in hoc volumine composuit, i.e. ordinavit. Non
eorum auctor vel conditor fuit, nisi forte quis eum auctorem idcirco
dicere velit, quoniam multa ex parte sua sanctorum sententias
distinguendo et exponendo in paragraphis suis ponit." Johann Friedrich
Schulte, ed., *Die summa über das Decretum Gratiani* (Aalen: Scientia
Verlag, 1965), 5.

[11] Andrew Kraebel, “Modes of Authorship and the Making of Medieval
English Literature,” in *The Cambridge Handbook of Literary Authorship*,
ed. Ingo Berensmeyer, Gert Buelens, and Marysa Demoor (Cambridge, United
Kingdom ; Cambridge University Press, 2019), 98–114, 98. Aliquis scribit
et sua et aliena, sed sua tanquam principalia, aliena tamquam annexa ad
confirmationem; et talis debet dici *auctor*. Bonaventure, *Commentaria
in Quatuor Libros Sententiarum Magistri Petri Lombardi*, vol. 1,
Doctoris Seraphici S. Bonaventurae S. R. E. Episcopi Cardinalis Opera
Omnia (Ad Claras Aquas (Quaracchi): Ex Typographia Collegii S.
Bonaventurae, 1882), 14-15.

[12] (trans. PLE) Talis fuit Magister, qui sententias suas ponit et
Patrum sententiis confirmat. Unde vere debet dici auctor huius libri.
Bonaventure, *Commentaria in Quatuor Libros Sententiarum Magistri Petri
Lombardi*, 14-15.

[13] Cf. (Atria A. Larson, *Master of Penance: Gratian and the
Development of Penitential Thought and Law in the Twelfth Century*,
Studies in Medieval and Early Modern Canon Law, volume 11 (Washington,
D.C: The Catholic University of America Press, 2014), 12–13, n30) "My
refusal to apply the standard label of 'canonical collection' to the
*Decretum* is meant to make clear that I do not classify the rest of the
*Decretum Gratiani* as a canonical collection in the exact way that the
work of Regino, Burchard, Anselm of Lucca, or even Ivo of Chartres (and
many anonymous compilers) was, and yet it was a canonical collection in
many respects, especially considering much of its source material and
how it was used. Many abbreviations of the *Decretum*, for instance, are
clear testimony that some religious houses and episcopal courts wanted
the canons, not the *dicta*; they wanted a pure canonical collection
that could serve as a reference manual to the church's law."

[14] In earlier collections such as the *Collectio Dionysiana* (ca.500)
the material was organized chronologically.

[15] 302,384 words or 71.2% of the vulgate *Decretum*.

[16] The prologue was prepended (in slightly different forms) to both
the *Decretum* and *Panormia* of Ivo of Chartres. For the edited Latin
text, see (Bruce Clark Brasington, ed., *Ways of Mercy: The Prologue of
Ivo of Chartres ; Edition and Analysis*, Vita Regularis, Bd. 2 (Münster
: Piscataway, N.J: LIT ; Distributed in North America by Transaction
Publishers, 2004)) For an English translation, see (Somerville and
Brasington, *Prefaces to Canon Law Books in Latin Christianity*,
132–58).

[17] "Master Gratian, antonomastically called in this work 'the Master,'
**in place of an introduction** prefaced his book with the following
title, *Concord of discordant canons*, by which he precisely sets forth
subject matter and intention. Somerville and Brasington, *Prefaces to
Canon Law Books in Latin Christianity*, 201. **Add quote in Latin. As
noted above (Chapter 1), the title comes from a gloss, not from
Gratian.**

[18] 81,008 words or 19.1%.

[19] "There are two difficulties when this authorship comes to be
determined. One is that the *Concordia* is a book in three distinctive
parts, with several distinctive sections within the parts, and these
parts have undergone editing as to chapter heading, chapter insertions,
and chapter order. Whatever the later formal ascription, is Gratian
responsible for all these parts? The other difficulty is the range of
roles the one 'responsible' person might have had---compiler,
commentator, rubricator, reviser. Was Gratian one or all? The
difficulties relate to one another, because evidence that Gratian was,
say, the commentator of Part II does not establish what role he had in
Part I." (Noonan, “Gratian Slept Here,” 162–63).

[20] D.3 c.1-2. *Decretum Gratiani*, First Recension, edition in
progress. Anders Winroth, 3/21/2017, p.5, l.13-18.

[21] "Porro canonum alii sunt decreta Pontificum, alii statuta
conciliorum." D.3 d.p.c.2. *Decretum Gratiani*, First Recension, edition
in progress. Anders Winroth, 3/21/2017, p.5, l.19-20.

[22] In addition to genuine papal material, for example a large number
of excerpts from the register containing the letters of Gregory I,
Gratian used a number of pseudo-papal sources, which will be discussed
below in the context of Gratian's formal sources.

[23] JK 255. (Philipp Jaffé, ed., *Regesta pontificum romanorum*, 2nd
ed, vol. 1 (Graz: Akademische Druck, 1956), 40) \["Register of papal
letters to 1198. Reflecting the editors who contributed to various time
periods, the work is conventionally given an abbreviated citation as JK
to the year 590, JE for 590-882 and JL for 883-1198." [Papal Documents:
A Finding Aid \| Columbia University
Libraries](http://library.columbia.edu/locations/butler/medieval-studies/guides/papaldoc.html)\]

[24] D.3 d.p.c.2. *Decretum Gratiani*, First Recension, edition in
progress. Anders Winroth, 3/21/2017.

[25] D.16 c.11. *Decretum Gratiani*, First Recension, edition in
progress. Anders Winroth, 3/21/2017. p.32, l.7-9.

[26] Ambrose, Augustine, Gregory the Great, and Jerome were formally
recognized as doctors by Boniface VIII in 1298 in the *Liber* *Sextus*,
VI 3.22, *Gloriosus Deus in sanctis suis* in *De reliquiis et
veneratione sanctorum* (edF 2.1059-1060). Leo the Great was only added
to the list in 1754.

[27] First recension D.15 c.3, §1-§16 in Friedberg, §2-§17 in Thompson
and Gordley.

[28] "The *Moralia*: based on talks Gregory gave on the Book of Job to
his 'brethren' who accompanied him to Constantinople while he held the
office of papal *apocrisiarius* (see above). The work as we have it is
the result of Gregory's revision and completion of it soon after his
accession to the papal office." R. A. Markus, *Gregory the Great and His
World* (Cambridge ; New York: Cambridge University Press, 1997), 15. "In
the case of Gratian's chapters from Gregory I's *Moralia in Job*, the
unusually precise citations in Gratian's inscriptions lead to the
conclusion that he used this work directly (as Munier already argued)."
Peter Landau, “Gratian and the Decretum Gratiani,” in *The History of
Medieval Canon Law in the Classical Period, 1140-1234: From Gratian to
the Decretals of Pope Gregory IX*, ed. Wilfried Hartmann and Kenneth
Pennington, History of Medieval Canon Law (Washington, D.C: Catholic
University of America Press, 2008), 22–54, 35. "There are six chapters
taken from the *Moralia*, and Gratian noted the book and chapter of the
text in his inscription: D.13 c.2; D.45 c.9 and c.14; D.46 c.1 and c.2;
D.47 c.3. Each text is also in the first recension." Landau, “Gratian
and the Decretum Gratiani”, 35n22.

[29]  (Peter Landau, “Gratians Arbeitsplan,” in *Iuri Canonico
Promovendo: Festschrift für Heribert Schmitz Zum 65. Geburtstag*, ed.
Winfried Aymans and Karl-Theodor Geringer (Regensburg: F. Pustet, 1994),
691–707). See also (Winroth, *The Making of Gratian’s Decretum*, 15–17).

[30] For the *Collectio IX librorum* of the Ms Vat. lat. 1349 (*9L*),
see (Linda Fowler-Magerl, *Clavis Canonum: Selected Canon Law
Collections Before 1140: Access with Data Processing*, Monumenta
Germaniae Historica. Hilfsmittel 21 (Hannover: Hahnsche, 2005), 79–82)

[31] Mayke De Jong, *The Penitential State: Authority and Atonement in
the Age of Louis the Pious, 814-840* (Cambridge, UK ; New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2009).

[32] For the much-criticized 1863 edition, see (Paul Hinschius, ed.,
*Decretales pseudo-Isidorianae, et, Capitula Angilramni: ad fidem
librorum manuscriptorum recensuit, fontes indicavit, commentationem de
collectione pseudo-Isidori praemisit* (Aalen: Scientia Verlag, 1963)).
Recent efforts to replace the Hinschius edition include [Zum Inhalt von
"Projekt Pseudoisidor"](http://www.pseudoisidor.mgh.de/) by Karl-Georg
Schon; and [Pseudo-Isidore \| An edition-in-progress of the False
Decretals](https://pseudo-isidore.com/) by Eric Knibbs. The work of
Klaus Zechiel-Eckes (†2010) forms the basis for much of our current
understanding of the place and date at which the pseudo-Isidorian
collection was compiled (Corbie in the mid-830s), and therefore of the
political motivations of the compilers; see (“Ein Blick in Pseudoisidors
Werkstatt. Studien zum Entstehungsprozeß der falschen Dekretalen. Mit
einem exemplarischen editorischen Anhang (Pseudo-Julius an die
orientalischen Bischöfe, JK +196),” *Francia* 28, no. 1 (2001): 37–90).
Horst Fuhrmann, “The Pseudo-Isidorian Forgeries,” in *Papal Letters in
the Early Middle Ages*, ed. Detlev Jasper and Horst Fuhrmann, History of
Medieval Canon Law (Washington, D.C.: Catholic University of America
Press, 2001), 137–95 provides a good general introduction to the forged
decretals; see also [Introduction to Pseudo-Isidore - Decretum
Gratiani](https://sites.google.com/a/yale.edu/decretumgratiani/introduction-to-pseudo-isidore)
by Eric Knibbs. See Horst Fuhrmann, *Einfluß und Verbreitung der
pseudoisidorischen Fälschungen : von ihrem Auftauchen bis in d. neuere
Zeit*, Schriften der Monumenta Germaniae historica, Deutsches Institut
für Erforschung des Mittelalters ; Bd. 24 (Stuttgart: Hiersemann, 1972)
on the influence of the forged decretals.

[33] "Altogether I have estimated that 252 out of the 315 *capitula*
were taken from Pseudo-Isidore." (J. T. Gilchrist, ed., *The Collection
in Seventy-Four Titles: A Canon Law Manual of the Gregorian Reform*,
Mediaeval Sources in Translation 22 (Toronto: Pontifical Institute of
Mediaeval Studies, 1980), 15)

[34] See Appendix 2 for the Python code listing for my implementation of
the recursive-descent parser. Thanks to Patricio Simari of the
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department at The Catholic
University of America, who provided helpful suggestions on parser
implementation. In Computer Science-theoretic terms, the parsed
*Decretum* can be thought of as an ordered tree, with parts,
distinctions, cases, and questions as interior nodes. A canon or
chapter, properly conceptualized as a node encapsulating rubrics,
inscriptions, canon texts, and *dicta post canones*, is also an internal
node. A *dictum* (*ante* or *post canonem*, or *initiale*) is a terminal
node. So are rubrics, inscriptions, and canon texts. A case statement
(*dictum initiale*) is always the first terminal node of a case. A
*dictum ante canonem* is always the first terminal node of a distinction
or question. The anomalous C.16 q.2 d.a.c.8 is actually the *dictum ante
canonem* introducing a vestigial fifth question positioned between C.16
q.2 and C.16 q.3 (see Friedberg, 1.787). The traditional notation
misleadingly implies that d.a.c.1 is a leaf node of c.1. In fact,
d.a.c.1 and c.1 are both child nodes at the same nesting level under one
parent distinction or question node. A *dictum post canonem* is an
optional, and usually final, terminal node of a canon.

[35] There are 11 *dicta post* (`<T P>`) tags in Part III (*de
Consecratione*) in the Reuter and Silagi e-text of the Friedberg
edition. Nine are really inscriptions, leaving two short *dicta post*,
*de Cons*. D.1 d.p.c.50 (54 words) and *de Cons*. D.4 d.p.c.20 (19
words).

[36] The distinction between rubrics and *dicta* is blurry: "Gratian ...
often melded the rubrics with the dicta." (Melodie Harris Eichbauer,
“St. Gall Stiftsbibliothek 673 and the Early Redactions of Gratian’s
Decretum,” *Bulletin of Medieval Canon Law* 27 (2007): 107). "Both J.
Rambaud-Buhot and John Noonan, Jr. have highlighted the similarity
between dicta and rubrics, that is, a rubric very often echoes the
dictum that immediately preceded it." and "These isolated instances in
the first cluster show that Gratian felt that the dictum was sufficient
for summarizing the following *auctoritas*." (Eichbauer, 115) **Expand
to include inscriptions.**

[37] "Since Gratian frequently took fragments of letters from the
Register of Gregory I---266 in all---using the inscription 'in
registro', older research assumed that he must have used this important
source in the form of the *Registrum Hadrianum*. According to more
recent research (Landau), even these texts from the Register of Gregory
I found in Gratian derive almost without exception from canonical
collections predating Gratian; the direct use of the Register is
probable in only a single case." \[C.27 q.1 c.19 (JE 1496)\] (Landau,
“Gratian and the Decretum Gratiani,” 34).

[38] Winroth observed that there are 398 *de eodem* rubrics in the
vulgate *Decretum*, see (Anders Winroth, “Uncovering Gratian’s Original
Decretum with the Help of Electronic Resources,” *Columbia Library
Columns* 46, no. 1 (1997): 28); and (Winroth, *The Making of Gratian’s
Decretum*, 127). The precision of this frequently-cited number can be
refined in ways that demonstrate the true power of the careful use of
electronic resources for the study of this, or any, text. (In the
following examples, `edF.txt` is the filename of the OCP-format Reuter
and Silagi e-text of the Friedberg edition. The commands used in the
examples should work on any macOS or Linux-based system.) Winroth's
figure of 398 simply represents the number of occurrences of the
substring "de eodem" in the file: `grep -i "de eodem" edF.txt | wc -l`
returns 398. Most, but not all, of the occurrences of the substring "de
eodem" do, in fact, appear in the context of a rubric, In one case, *de
Cons.* D.2 c.3, the inscription reads *Idem de eodem* ("the same person
about the same thing"), and refining the search to count those
occurrences that do **not** appear alongside the OCP rubric `<T R>` or
inscription `<T I>` tags reveal that in 8 instances, the words *de
eodem* are simply part of the text of a canon or *dictum*:
`grep -i "de eodem" edF.txt | egrep -v "<T R>|<T I>" | wc -l` returns 8.
Setting aside, then, those instances in which the words *de eodem* occur
in canons, *dicta*, or inscriptions (and acknowledging that the criteria
for distinguishing between inscriptions and rubrics can be blurry)
leaves 389 rubrics containing the substring "de eodem":
`grep -i "de eodem" edF.txt | grep "<T R>" | wc -l` returns 389. Of
those 389, there are 373 *De eodem* rubrics and 13 *Item de eodem*
rubrics (12 of those 13 introduce second-recension canons in D.30 in the
first part of the *Decretum*):
`fgrep "De eodem." edF.txt | grep "<T R>" | wc -l` returns 373, and
`fgrep "Item de eodem." edF.txt | grep "<T R>" | wc -l` returns 13. In
the three remaining cases, words *de eodem* are part of a longer rubric:
`grep -i "de eodem" edF.txt | grep "<T R>" | fgrep -v "De eodem." | fgrep -v "Item de eodem."`
returns the rubrics for D.23 c.32 (*De eodem, et ut clerici comam non
nutriant*), C.22 q.5 c. 16 (*De eodem, et ut a ieiunis iuramenta
prestentur*), and *de Cons.* D.1 c.17 (*De eodem, et quod octo diebus
dedicationum*). Winroth's larger point, however, had to do with the
place of the *de eodem* rubrics in the "untidy seams" problem. For that
purpose, only the 137 *de eodem* rubrics in the first recension of the
Decretum are potentially relevant evidence. **See GitHub
[Sand](https://github.com/decretist/Sand/tree/master/rubrics)
repository. This result (137) is potentially off by one, i.e., the total
number of *de eodem* rubrics in the first and second recension rubric
data sets is 388 instead of 389, with no way to tell whether the missing
rubric is from the first or second recension.**

[39] Stephan Kuttner, “Research on Gratian: Acta and Agenda,” in
*Studies in the History of Medieval Canon Law*, Collected Studies CS325
(Aldershot, Hampshire, Great Britain : Brookfield, Vt., USA: Variorum ;
Gower, 1990), 13.

[40] Winroth, *The Making of Gratian’s Decretum*, 15, 70.

[41] "Gratian rarely took his rubrics from earlier collections. Rather
he created his own ..." (Eichbauer, “St. Gall Stiftsbibliothek 673 and
the Early Redactions of Gratian’s Decretum,” 107)

[42] Gratian is known to have used Alger as both a source, especially in
C.1, and, to some extent, as a methodological model. (Winroth, *The
Making of Gratian’s Decretum*, 17, 39, 144). See Robert Kretzschmar's
edition, (*Alger von Lüttichs Traktat "De misericordia et iustitia": ein
kanonistischer Konkordanzversuch aus der Zeit des Investiturstreits:
Untersuchungen und Edition*, Quellen und Forschungen zum Recht im
Mittalter, Bd. 2 (Sigmaringen: J. Thorbecke, 1985)). Somewhat
confusingly for Gratian scholars, Kretzschmar uses regular typeface for
Alger's *dicta* and italics for the canons, the opposite of the
convention adopted by Friedberg and maintained by Winroth.

[43] Winroth, *The Making of Gratian’s Decretum*, 187.

[44] Rufinus and Stephen of Tournai describe the tripartite division in
exactly the same words: "librum suum in tribus partibus distinguit,
quarum primam ministeriis, secundam negotiis, tertiam ecclesiasticis
deputat sacramentis." (Heinrich Singer, *Summa Decretorum* (Aalen :
Paderborn: Scientia Verlag ; F. Schöningh, 1963), 5) "he divides his
book into three parts, the first of which he devotes to ecclesiastical
ministries, the second to \[ecclesiastical\] business, and the third to
ecclesiastical sacraments." (Somerville and Brasington, *Prefaces to
Canon Law Books in Latin Christianity*, 192–93) (Rufinus) "Harum primam
ministeriis, secundam negotiis, tertiam ecclesiasticis deputat
sacramentis." (Schulte, *Die summa über das Decretum Gratiani*, 6) "The
first of these parts is devoted to ecclesiastical ministries, the second
to ecclesiastical problems, the third to ecclesiastical sacraments."
(Somerville and Brasington, *Prefaces to Canon Law Books in Latin
Christianity*, 201) (Stephen of Tournai) (Brasington translated the
preface of Rufinus, Somerville that of Stephen of Tournai. (Somerville
and Brasington, *Prefaces to Canon Law Books in Latin Christianity*,
vii). There is no indication as to why Somerville chose to translate
*negotiis* as "problems" rather than "business".)

Given the probable dates of the *summae* of Rufinus (1164) and Stephen
of Tournai (1165/66), it is just possible that Stephen got the wording
from the preface to the *Summa* of Rufinus. Kenneth Pennington,
[Rufinus](http://amesfoundation.law.harvard.edu/BioBibCanonists/Report_Biobib2.php?record_id=a492)
and [Stephanus
Tornacensis](http://amesfoundation.law.harvard.edu/BioBibCanonists/Report_Biobib2.php?record_id=a502),
*Bio-Bibliographical Guide to Medieval and Early Modern Jurists.*
Stephen, however, had been a student of Rufinus in Bologna, and it seems
more likely that this is something he had heard Rufinus say in lecture.
**Kenneth Pennington, "Étienne of Tournai".**

[45] "In 1933 two scholars, Franz Gillmann and Adam Vetulani, concluded
independently that Gratian himself did not introduce the division of the
Distinctiones into the first part of the Decretum. They attributed the
division to the members of the schools, suggesting that Paucapalea, the
first decretist, may have made it." Stanley Chodorow, *Christian
Political Theory and Church Politics in the Mid-Twelfth Century; the
Ecclesiology of Gratian’s Decretum*, Publications of the Center for
Medieval and Renaissance Studies, U.C.L.A., 5 (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1972), 15. Adam Vetulani, *Sur Gratien et les
Décrétales*, Collected studies ; CS308. (Aldershot, Hampshire: Variorum,
1990). "Distinctiones apposuit in prima parte et ultima Paucapalea ..."
Terence P. McLaughlin, ed., *The Summa Parisiensis on the Decretum
Gratiani* (Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1952), 1.
(Paucapalea arranged the distinctions in the first part and the last,
trans. PLE)

[46] Kenneth Pennington, “The Biography of Gratian, the Father of Canon
Law,” in *A Service Beyond All Recompense*, ed. Kurt Martens (Catholic
University of America Press, 2018), 366.

[47] Somerville and Brasington, *Prefaces to Canon Law Books in Latin
Christianity*, 193.

[48] Distinctions 1-20 are conventionally referred to by modern scholars
as the treatise on laws (*tractatus de legibus*). I cannot find an
internal reference to it in the *Decretum* under that title.

[49] There are five internal references to the *tractatus ordinandorum*
in the vulgate *Decretum*:  
C.1 q.7 d.p.c.6 "Item: 'Priscis igitur, etc.' Require supra in tractatu
ordinandorum." (first recension, Friedberg 1.430): reference to D.55 c.1
(first recension, Friedberg 1.215).  
C.3 q.1 d.p.c.7 "Unde supra in tractatu ordinandorum: 'Si quis pecunia
uel gratia humana, seu populari uel militari tumultu, etc.'" (second
recension, Friedberg 1.507): reference to D.79 c.9 (first recension,
Friedberg 1.278).  
C.9 q.3 c.15 (inscription) "ut supra in tractatu ordinandorum, ubi
agitur de obedientia minorum erga maiores." (second recension, Friedberg
1.647): no canon incipit is provided, but this appears to be a reference
to D.93 c.9 (rubric): "Maioribus minores obedientiam exhibeant." (second
recension, Friedberg 1.321). **(Reference to epilogue.)**  
C.16 q.1 d.p.c.40 "Hoc idem datur intelligi ex uerbis B. Siluestri, qui
obedientiam minorum erga maiores assignans ait: 'Abbas hostiario,
monachus abbati sit subditus,' supra in tractatu ordinandorum." (second
recension, Friedberg 1.773): this also appears to be a reference to D.93
c.5. (second recension, Friedberg 1.321). C.16 q.1 d.p.c.40 is a
first-recension *dictum post* that was expanded in the second recension.
The reference to the second-recension chapter D.93 c.5 is in the text
added to the *dictum* in the second recension. **(Reference to
epilogue.)**  
*de Cons*. D.1 d.p.c.50 "Item Pelagius: 'Dilectionis tuae rescripta.'
Require in tractatu ordinandorum." (Friedberg 1.1303): reference to D.76
c.12 (first recension, Friedberg 1.271). Note that this reference occurs
in one of only two substantive *dicta post* in *de Cons*.

There is one additional internal reference to this treatise under the
title *tractatus de promotionibus clericorum*.  
C.16 q.1 d.p.c.20 "Gelasius tamen (sicut in tractatu de promotionibus
clericorum inuenitur) in capitulo illo: 'Monachus nouicius, etc.'
permittit illos ex dispensatione defensores fieri." (first recension,
Friedberg 1.766): reference to D.77 c.9 (first recension, Friedberg
1.274)

[50] **Placeholder for footnote c.**

[51] C.1 q.1 d.p.c.96 "Unde etiam ab ecclesia Romana repudiatur, et a
Deo fuisse percussus legitur in gestis Romanorum Pontificum hoc modo:
'Anastasius secundus natione Romanus, etc.' Require retro in tractatu
decretalium epistolarum." (first recension, Friedberg 1.392) refers to
D.19 c.9 (first recension, Friedberg 1.63). Use of the title "treatise
of decretal letters" strongly suggests that this is to be read as a
specific reference to a self-contained text corresponding to
distinctions 19-20 rather than to the treatise on laws generally.

[52] All of the empty questions contain a *dictum ante* (see below) in
the vulgate *Decretum*, but in three of the four cases it was added only
in the second recension: C.11 q.2 d.a.c.1, C.17 q.3 d.a.c.1, and C.22
q.3 d.a.c.1.

[53] The cases can be grouped thematically: simony (C.1), procedure
(CC.2-6), other (CC.7-10), other (CC.11-15), monastic (CC.16-20), other
(CC.21-22), heresy (CC.23-26), and marriage (CC.27-36). The thematic
groupings are to some extent a matter of opinion. Anders Winroth
referred me to Alfred Beyer's groupings which I have found useful.
Alfred Beyer, *Lokale Abbreviationen des Decretum Gratiani: Analyse und
Vergleich der Dekretabbreviationen "Omnes leges aut divine" (Bamberg),
"Humanum genus duobus regitur" (Pommersfelden) und "De his qui intra
claustra monasterii consistunt" (Lichtenthal, Baden-Baden)*, Bamberger
theologische Studien ; Bd. 6 (Frankfurt am Main ; PLang, 1998), 17.

[54] Winroth, *The Making of Gratian’s Decretum*, 5.

[55] Three early manuscripts (Gt, Pf, and Tr) contain the gloss:
"*Concordia discordantium canonum iuxta determinationem Gratiani
episcopi quae in duas partes principaliter est divisa* (The agreement of
disagreeing canons according to the determination of Bishop Gratian,
which is principally divided into two parts.)" Gt = Ghent, Bibl. der
Rijksuniversiteit 55; Pf = Paris, Bibl. Nationale lat. 3884 I and II;
and Tr = Trier, Stadtbibl. 906 (1141). See Noonan, “Gratian Slept Here”,
154; and Pennington, “The Biography of Gratian, the Father of Canon
Law”, 382.

[56] Add footnote restating distinction between canon and chapter.

[57] I continue here, as I have throughout Chapter 2, to use the name
Gratian as a conventional label for the author or authors of the
*Decretum*, while deferring judgement as to whether the name stands for
a single individual or many. Anticipating Chapter 3, the name Gratian
can be taken to stand for someone performing the author-function
(Foucault) with respect to a discrete selection of text under
consideration (e.g., a particular *dictum*).

[58] In Parts I and II, the part contains distinctions which contain
chapters (depth = 3). In Part II, the part contains cases which contain
questions which contain chapters (depth = 4).

[59] Friedberg, 1.1046.

[60] The formulaic transition markers used in the hypothetical case
statements are: *Hic primum queritur* (15), *Queritur* (8), *Modo primum
queritur* (3), *Nunc primum queritur* (3), *Primo queritur* (2), *Primum
queritur* (2), *Hic primo queritur* (1), *Modo queritur* (1), *Queritur
autem* (1).

[61] C.1 d.init., Friedberg 1.357. Although Gratian does not say so
explicitly, I think that we can reasonably infer that the father is an
urban merchant or professional, rather than a member of the landed
aristocracy, since his wealth is in a form sufficiently liquid to be
readily convertible into cash bribes.

<div align="center">
<a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/"><img alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0" src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-nd/4.0/88x31.png" /></a><br />This work is licensed under a <a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/">Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License</a>.
</div>
