The purpose of the following short introduction, addressed primarily to
non-medievalist (DH) readers, is to indicate the importance of Gratian's
*Decretum,* and to contextualize the composition of the *Decretum*
within the broader twelfth-century revolution in legal science.

The *Decretum* is *not* the kind of document, like the Fournier
Register, the record of an episcopal inquisition into Albigensian
heretics surviving in a single manuscript, that many non-specialists,
with a journalistic eye for the exotic and the extreme, take to be the
central concern of medieval studies.[^1] The *Decretum* was, instead,
both a normal and a normative text in its own time, and for centuries
thereafter. The *Decretum* survives in an unusually large number of
manuscripts -- around 150-200 from the twelfth century and around 600
for the medieval period overall.[^2] The *Decretum* was the fundamental
textbook for first-year university instruction in canon law through the
seventeenth century. As the first volume of the *Corpus iuris canonici*,
the *Decretum* remained valid law in the Roman Catholic Church right up
until 1917, and exercised enormous influence over the 1917 and 1983
codifications of canon law that replaced the old *Corpus*. The relevance
of the *Decretum* extends to everyday contemporary life. It is quite
common for twenty-first century American Roman Catholics to have had
some experience with diocesan marriage tribunals and the marriage
annulment process (for example, my wife once had to submit written
testimony to a diocesan marriage tribunal in support of her sister's
petition to have her first marriage annulled). When they come into
contact with the marriage annulment process, contemporaries become
participants in a legal system that, at least in its conceptual
outlines, was first systematized by Gratian in cases 27-36 in Part II of
the *Decretum*, the so-called marriage *causae*.

Presentation

Having considered how Gratian sourced and *collected* his materials --
the question of what canons are and where Gratian got them -- we now
turn to the question of how Gratian *presented* and *organized* the
canons he had collected. Here, it is important to distinguish between
*presentation*, the small-grain or micro structure of the *Decretum*,
and *organization*, the large-grain or macro structure of the
*Decretum*. Taking a bottom-up approach, we will first turn to the
presentation or small-grain structure.

It is necessary to be aware of the fact that when we discuss canons in
the specific context of Gratian's *Decretum*, we are using a subtly
different definition of the term than we used when discussing the
textual building blocks of the canonical tradition. The organization of
the Decretum is very regular (so structurally regular, in fact, that an
electronic version of the text can be cleanly taken apart using a
recursive descent parser), and should be thought of as a sequence of
hierarchically nested containers. The canon is the atomic container from
which the immediately higher-order containers (distinctions and
questions) in the Decretum are organized. \[We will unpack the canon
container into rubric, inscription, one or more texts, and *dictum*
*post*.\]

A canon is usually, though not always, introduced by a rubric, which is
a very short summary of what the canon is about. In 398 cases (wrong
number), the rubric just says "*de eodem*", which means "about the same
thing" (as the canon before). Most canons have an inscription, which
identifies the authority that is the source for the canon (usually a
papal decretal, a canon from an ecumenical council or a provincial
synod, or a patristic text). \[Eichbauer, p. 115, blur between rubric
and inscription. "Gratian rarely took his rubrics from earlier
collections. Rather he created his own and often melded the rubrics with
the dicta." p.107\] Because Gratian was getting his texts from previous
collections, the inscription was frequently incorrect, especially if the
text in question was one that had been included in the Pseudo-Isidorian
forgeries. This raises the need to distinguish between Gratian's
material sources \-- the original letter of Pope Gregory I, for example
\-- and his formal sources \-- the collection Gratian was actually
looking at when copying his text. Finally, there are the *dicta*
(literally, "things having been said"), which are statements Gratian is
making on his own authority as a jurist. It is the *dicta* that carry
the thread of Gratian's argument. \[Here I am only talking about *dicta
post canones*. Dicta ante canones are not part of the canon container
but instead part of the distinction or question container (always
d.a.c.1 or equivalent). There are three kinds of dicta: d.init (first
leaf node of case or *causa* container), d.a.c. (first leaf node of
distinction or question container), and d.p.c. (optional last leaf of
canon container). Dicta are text that Gratian (whoever we think he is)
actually wrote and are therefore subject to function word analysis for
authorship attribution.\]

"The *dicta* in Gratian's *Decretum* bring the reader closer to its
author than any other part of the text." (Winroth, *The Making of
Gratian's Decretum*, 187)

The hypothetical case statements or *themata* that introduce each of the
thirty-six *causae* (cases) that constitute Part II of the *Decretum*
reflect at least in places an outlook and a set of concerns that
university-educated urban professionals of the present day would not
find it difficult to identify with. At a time when considerable
attention is being paid in the realm of popular discourse (if not yet
public policy) to the issue of "opportunity hoarding" on behalf of
upper- and upper-middle class children by their university-educated,
urban professional parents, the intense concern of "a certain man" in
the first case statement to secure a good ecclesiastical career for his
son (and his willingness on more than one occasion to resort to bribery
in order to realize that objective) has a distinctly contemporary feel
to it.[^3] (Although Gratian does not say so explicitly, I think that we
can reasonably infer that the father is an urban merchant or
professional, rather than a member of the landed aristocracy, since his
wealth, the source of several bribes, is so readily convertible into
cash.)

Organization

The *Decretum* in the form that circulated after around 1150 (the Köln
Dombibliothek manuscripts 127 and 128 are good early examples) has three
parts. The first part consists of 101 distinctions. Groups of
distinctions form treatises within the work: distinctions 1-20, for
example, form a treatise on laws (*tractatus de legibus*) that explores
the sources of law. Other topics covered include ecclesiastical
hierarchy and clerical discipline. The second part consists of 36 cases.
A treatise on penance (*tractatus de penitentia*) is attached to the
third question of case 33. The third part of the *Decretum* is a
treatise on consecration (*tractatus de consecratione*).[^4]

The cases are hypotheticals like those used in modern law schools, and
some of them are quite far-fetched. In case 28, for example, a married
infidel converts to Christianity, as a result of which his wife
separates from him out of hatred for his new faith. (By \"infidel,\"
Gratian means a Muslim.) The convert then takes a new Christian wife,
and after she dies, he is made a priest. Finally, "on account of the
merit of his life and learning," he is elected bishop. Gratian extracts
questions from this fantastical fact-pattern, however, that are of
considerable theoretical (if not practical) interest: whether there can
be marriage between infidels, whether there is ever a situation in which
a man can take another wife if his previous wife is still alive; and
whether someone who had one wife before he was baptized and another wife
after he was baptized should be considered a bigamist.

*Correctores Romani* edition (1582)

The *Decretum* never received the kind of formal ecclesiastical (papal
or conciliar) recognition that was conferred on decretal collections
like the *Liber Extra*, *Liber Sextus*, and *Clementinae*. Nevertheless,
it remained foundational both to the *Corpus Iuris Canonici*, the body
of canon law that governed the Roman Catholic Church right up until
1917, as well as to the academic study of canon law throughout the
medieval and well into the early modern periods. As a result, the text
of the *Decretum* came in for close attention as part of the reform
program initiated at the Council of Trent (1545-1563). A commission led
by the Spanish archbishop Antonio Agustín (1517-1586), the *Correctores*
*Romani*, was charged with producing an approved version of the text of
the *Decretum* (along with the rest of the *Corpus* *Iuris* *Canonici*)
for the age of the printing press.

The *Correctores *proceeded from the Renaissance Humanist assumption
that their job was to identify and include the most textually correct
version of the material source for each of Gratian\'s authorities. In
this sense the *Correctores* were less concerned with getting at the
text of the collection Gratian actually compiled, and more concerned
with getting at the text that they thought Gratian should have compiled,
if his concerns had been those of a Renaissance philological
scholar.[^5]

The 1582 printed edition of the *Decretum* includes the ordinary gloss,
the standardized commentary by [Johannes
Teutonicus](http://amesfoundation.law.harvard.edu/BioBibCanonists/Report_Biobib2.php?record_id=a303) (c.1170--1245)
in 1216, which was revised and updated by [Bartholomeus
Brixiensis](http://amesfoundation.law.harvard.edu/BioBibCanonists/Report_Biobib2.php?record_id=a050) (fl.1234--1258)
around 1240-1245. UCLA\'s online version of the [Corpus Iuris Canonici
(1582)](http://digital.library.ucla.edu/canonlaw/) is a convenient way
for modern scholars to consult the ordinary gloss, which is an important
tool for understanding the reception of Gratian\'s text by medieval
jurists.

Bibliography

Appelt, Heinrich, ed. *Die Urkunden der deutschen Könige und Kaiser*.
Vol. X,2. Monumenta Germaniae historica. Diplomata regum et imperatorum
Germaniae. Berlin: Weidmannsche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1979. (UCSD DD3.M8
.D7 v.10 no.2)

Chodorow, Stanley. *Christian Political Theory and Church Politics in
the Mid-Twelfth Century; the Ecclesiology of Gratian's Decretum*.
Publications of the Center for Medieval and Renaissance Studies,
U.C.L.A., 5. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972.

Christensen, Katherine. "Introduction." In *The Treatise on Laws:
(Decretum DD. 1-20)*, ix--xxvii. Studies in Medieval and Early Modern
Canon Law, v. 2. Washington, D.C: Catholic University of America Press,
1993.

Dufour, Jean, Gérard Giordanegno, and André Gouron. "L'attrait Des
'Leges': Note Sur La Lettre d'un Moine Victorin (Vers 1124/1127)."
*Studia et Documenta Historiae et Iuris* 45 (1979): 504--29.

Gundula Grebner, 'Lay Patronate in Bologna in the first half of the 12th
Century: Regular Canons, Notaries, and the Decretum', *Europa und seine
Regionen: 2000 Jahre Rechtsgeschichte*, ed. Andreas Bauer and Karl H. L.
Welker (Vienna 2007) 107-122.

Hartmann, Wilfried, and Kenneth Pennington, eds. *The History of
Medieval Canon Law in the Classical Period, 1140-1234: From Gratian to
the Decretals of Pope Gregory IX*. History of Medieval Canon Law.
Washington, D.C: Catholic University of America Press, 2008.

Jansen, Katherine Ludwig, Joanna H Drell, and Frances Andrews, eds.
"Roman Law and Legal Studies: Three Texts (ca. 1124-66)." In *Medieval
Italy: Texts in Translation*, 167--72. The Middle Ages Series.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2009. (UCSD DG501 .M535
2009)

Manaresi, Cesare, ed. *I placiti del "Regnum Italiae."* 3 vols. Fonti
per la storia d'Italia, pubblicate dall' Istituto storico italiano per
il Medio Evo \[no. 92\] 96-97. Roma: Tip. del Senato, 1955.

Martyn, John R. C., trans. *The Letters of Gregory the Great*. Mediaeval
Sources in Translation 40. Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval
Studies, 2004.

Müller, Wolfgang P. "The Recovery of Justinian's Digest in the Middle
Ages." *Bulletin of Medieval Canon Law* 20 (1990): 1--29.

Paolo Nardi, "Fonti canoniche in una sentenza senese del 1150", in
*Life, Law, and Letters: Historical Studies in Honour of Antonio García
y García*, ed. Peter Linehan, Studia Gratiana 29 (Rome: Libr. Ateneo
Salesiano, 1998), 661-70. (CUA BV 103 .G77)\
<http://catalog.wrlc.org/cgi-bin/Pwebrecon.cgi?BBID=1024288>

Noonan, John T. "Gratian Slept Here: The Changing Identity of the Father
of the Systematic Study of Canon Law." *Traditio* 35 (January 1, 1979):
145--72.

Norberg, Dag Ludvig, ed. *S. Gregorii Magni Registrum Epistularum, Libri
VIII-XIV, Appendix*. Corpus Christianorum. Series Latina, 140 A.
Turnholti: Brepols, 1982.

Pennington, Kenneth. "The Biography of Gratian, the Father of Canon
Law." *Villanova Law Review* 59 (2014): 679--706.

Radding, Charles. *The Origins of Medieval Jurisprudence: Pavia and
Bologna, 850- 1150*. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1988.

Radding, Charles, and Antonio Ciaralli. *The Corpus Iuris Civilis in the
Middle Ages: Manuscripts and Transmission from the Sixth Century to the
Juristic Revival*. Brill's Studies in Intellectual History, v. 147.
Leiden ; Boston: Brill, 2007.

Somerville, Robert, and Bruce Clark Brasington, eds. *Prefaces to Canon
Law Books in Latin Christianity: Selected Translations, 500-1245*. New
Haven, Conn: Yale University Press, 1998.

Sommar, Mary E. *The Correctores Romani: Gratian's Decretum and the
Counter-Reformation Humanists*. Pluralisierung & Autorität, Bd. 19.
Berlin : New Brunswick: Lit ; distributed by Transaction Publishers,
2009.

Thompson, Augustine, and James Gordley, trans. *The Treatise on Laws:
(Decretum DD. 1-20)*. Studies in Medieval and Early Modern Canon Law, v.
2. Washington, D.C: Catholic University of America Press, 1993.

Wei, John C. *Gratian the Theologian*. Studies in Medieval and Early
Modern Canon Law, Volume 13. Washington, D.C: Catholic University of
America Press, 2016.

<http://www.jstor.org.proxycu.wrlc.org/stable/j.ctt19rmcjf> (CUA)

<https://muse.jhu.edu/book/44736>

<http://roger.ucsd.edu/record=b9134766~S9>

<http://catalog.wrlc.org/cgi-bin/Pwebrecon.cgi?BBID=16183186>

<https://scholarworks.iu.edu/journals/index.php/tmr/article/view/23720/29424>

Weigand, Rudolf. "Frühe Kanonisten und ihre Karriere in der Kirsche."
*Zeitschrift der Savigny-Stiftung für Rechtsgeschichte, Kanonistische
Abteilung* 76 (1990): 135--55. (CUA BV 102 .Z48 K16)

Winroth, Anders. *The Making of Gratian's Decretum*. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2000. (UCSD K 3282 .C2 G7339 2000)

Winroth, Anders. "Law Schools in the Twelfth Century." In *Mélanges en
l'honneur d'Anne Lefebvre-Teillard*, edited by Bernard d'Alteroche,
Florence Demoulin-Auzary, Olivier Deschamps, and Franck Roumy, 1057--64.
Paris: Éd. Panthéon-Assas, 2009.

<http://www.dmgh.de/de/fs1/object/goToPage/bsb00000457.html?pageNo=36>

There is a convention in scholarly writing where the researcher presents
their results, but carefully removes the scaffolding and effaces the
process by which those results were actually arrived at. \[My intention
is to show rather than hide the process by which I arrived at the
results that I am presenting.\] I did not start out my dissertation
project thinking of the authorship of the case statements or *themata*
introducing each of the 36 *causae* that make up Part II of the
*Decretum* as a research problem. I assumed that, by definition, the
author of the case statements was identical with the author of at least
the first-recension *dicta*. \[Tie this in with Winroth's two Gratians
chapter: to the extent that there's some one person we can point to as
mapping to our idea of Gratian, it's the author of the first-recension
dicta.\]

Notes from 10 August 2017 (*depositio Gratiani*) meeting with Stan
Chodorow:

-   1120: "Holy shit, we're independent!"

-   Formation: pay attention to *what's* being formed -- systematic
    canonical jurisprudence or, less precisely, canon law.

-   Transition: Where do Gratian and the *Decretum* lie along the
    (ground track or trajectory of) transition of the church from Leo IX
    († 1054) to Innocent III († 1216)?

Notes 15 September 2017

"Considering that the first \[recension\] may be a record of the first
'university course' in canon law ..." Winroth, *The Making of Gratian's
Decretum*, 194

Yes, but not in the way Anders is envisioning here. Rather, the first
university course in canon law consisted of the Master reading from a
pile of books, the formal sources, guided by his original handwritten
list of hypothetical case statements (*themata*). The first recension
represents a reconstruction of that course by some of the original
Master's students.

"Gratian 1 and the Lombard were in effect forced to create their own
authoritative texts (their authority deriving from the fact that they
consisted mainly of quotations) to be able to effectively teach their
subjects." (Winroth, *The Making of Gratian's Decretum*, 191.)

Gratian

The starting point for all modern scholarship on Gratian himself is John
T. Noonan Jr.'s classic 1979 *Traditio* article "Gratian slept here: The
changing identity of the father of the systematic study of canon law".
Noonan's approach is apophatic, demonstrating that there is no sound
historical basis for most of the affirmative statements, for example
that Gratian was a Camaldolese monk at SS. Felix and Nabor in Bologna,
that many mid-twentieth century handbooks and reference works presented
as commonplace.

Very little is known about the historical Gratian, and almost everything
that previous generations thought was known about Gratian has proved, on
closer examination, to be myth.[^6] On the evidence found in the
*Decretum*, Gratian seems to have been less interested in contemporary
ecclesiastical or secular politics in general, and in the Investiture
Controversy in particular, than some modern scholars think he should
have been. Gratian similarly seems, based on the relatively limited use
he makes in the *Decretum* of material from the *Codex* and *Digest* of
Justinian, to have been either less interested in, or less aware of, the
revival of the study of Roman law in the early twelfth century than we
think he should have been. On the other hand, he seems to have been more
aware of, and more interested in, the emergence of scholastic theology
in northern France than we can easily explain.

[^1]: The manuscript is Vat. Lat. 4030. Jean Duvernoy, ed., *Le Registre
    d'inquisition de Jacques Fournier, Évêque de Pamiers (1318-1325)*, 3
    vols., Bibliothèque Méridonale. 2. Ser, t. 41 (Toulouse: É. Privat,
    1965). See also [Inquisition Records of Jacques
    Fournier](http://www.sjsu.edu/people/nancy.stork/jacquesfournier/)
    ("An on-going English translation of the Inquisition Records of
    Jacques Fournier, Bishop of Pamiers, France, 1318-1325") by Nancy P.
    Stork (SJSU).

[^2]: These numbers get thrown around a lot, but where do they come
    from? "My listing of more than 600 manuscripts containing the
    *Decretum* will appear in Kenneth Pennington and Wilfried Hartmann,
    eds., *History of Medieval Canon Law*, 11." Anders Winroth, *The
    Making of Gratian's Decretum* (Cambridge: Cambridge University
    Press, 2000) 122, fn.2. This list has never made it into print as
    far as I know. For a reasonably complete and current list, see the
    entry for
    [Gratian](http://amesfoundation.law.harvard.edu/BioBibCanonists/Report_Biobib2.php?record_id=a242)
    in Kenneth Pennington's Bio-Bibliographic Guide to Medieval and
    Early Modern Jurists hosted by the Ames Foundation at Harvard
    University.

[^3]: "Quidam habens filium ..." C.1, d.init., edF. 1.357.

[^4]: Anders Winroth, *The Making of Gratian's* Decretum, 5.

[^5]: The idea that the *Correctores* were trying to reproduce the text
    of the *Decretum* as they though Gratian should have written it, as
    opposed to the text as he actually wrote it, goes back at least as
    far as Friedberg: "Vides non id in animo habuisse correctores
    Romanos, ut restitueretur decretum, quale a Gratiano compositum
    esset, sed quale a Gratiano componi debuisset." ("You see it in the
    mind that the *Correctores Romani* had, as the *Decretum* was
    restored, not how it was composed by Gratian, but how it ought to
    have been composed by Gratian." trans. PLE) (edF 1.lxxviii, see also
    Anders Winroth, "[Emil Friedberg\'s Edition of Gratian\'s Decretum:
    An
    Evaluation](http://mahan.wonkwang.ac.kr/link/med/law/canon-law/gratianus/friedberg.html)".)

[^6]: John T. Noonan, Jr. "Gratian slept here: The changing identity of
    the father of the systematic study of canon law", *Traditio*, 1979
