Roland Barthes's 1967 essay "The Death of the Author" holds a place in
literary studies somewhat similar to the place that Noonan's "Gratian
Slept Here" holds in canon law studies---it is a foundational clearing
of the ground of older ways of thinking in the field. Although the title
of the essay was a lightning-rod in 1980s theory war polemics, taken as
if Barthes were arguing that texts somehow wrote themselves,
Medievalists will recognize the French title of the essay, "La mort de
l'auteur," as a pun on *Le Morte d'Arthur*. Barthes's essay is short,
and at least compared with Foucault, relatively free of arcane technical
terms. Barthes was a literary critic and scholar making an argument to
other literary critics and scholars against a well-established approach
to the close-reading of literary texts that focuses on the biographical
and historical context of the author and its relationship to the text.

Barthes uses the terms "Author" (and in one place "Author-God"),
capitalized starting at the third paragraph of the essay, to indicate
the conceptualization of authorship he is arguing against. An Author is
the creative intellect uniquely responsible for a literary text, and "is
in the same relation of antecedence to his work as a father to his
child."[1] The term "author" appears throughout the essay where Barthes
intends to use the word in its more general and non-technical sense.
Barthes argues that authors cannot be Authors, since because all
literary texts are socially constructed, no person or persons can have a
parent-child relationship to a text: "We know now that a text is not a
line of words releasing a single 'theological' meaning (the 'message' of
the Author-God) but a multi-dimensional space in which a variety of
writings, none of them original, blend and clash. The text is a tissue
of quotations drawn from the innumerable centres of culture."[2] Barthes
uses the term scriptor, never capitalized, to indicate an alternative
conceptualization of authorship in which the performative aspect of the
author's act is the central focus. Barthes uses the terms "criticism"
and "critic" to refer respectively to the activity of close-reading a
literary text and one engaging in that activity. Translating the terms
as "reading" and "reader" would not be seriously misleading. In exactly
one place toward the end of the essay, Barthes uses the term "Critic" in
opposition to Author ("the reign of the Author has also been that of the
Critic")[3] in a way that suggests that the Critic (as opposed to the
critic) is somehow called into being by, and only exists in relation to,
the Author (as opposed to author).

The *Decretum* is not a literary text, but the *dicta* have features
that make it worthwhile to at least consider whether Barthes offers a
useful and relevant perspective from which to assess Gratian's
authorship. The *dicta* are socially constructed as complete and closed
bodies of text: my stylometric analysis suggests that there is no one
author (in the way that term is generally used) for the first-recension
*dicta* taken as a totality, and no one author for the second-recension
*dicta* taken as a totality. The *dicta* are socially constructed
individually: each *dictum* is a "tissue of quotations drawn from the
innumerable centres of culture." The *dicta* started life in a classroom
setting, and therefore have both a performative and a contemporaneous
aspect ("there is no other time than that of the enunciation and every
text is eternally written *here* and *now*")[4] This makes Gratian a
scriptor according to Barthes's definition. The *dicta* are the record
of a particular close-reading of the authoritative texts. This makes
Gratian a critic, although not necessarily a Critic, according to
Barthes's definition.

Post-Noonan scholarship on the biography of Gratian by Grebner, Winroth,
and Pennington has been conducted in the spirit of an Albert
Schweitzer-like "quest of the historical Gratian." The unifying idea has
been that if we can identify the historical Gratian, we will have
identified the author of the *Decretum*, with the authorship of the
*Decretum* understood in a way very similar to the way in which we might
understand the authorship of a nineteenth century novel. (It should be
noted that Noonan's own conceptualization of the authorship of the
*Decretum* is more nuanced than that of his successors.) In doing so,
these historians have uncritically accepted precisely the
conceptualization of authorship that Barthes is arguing against:

> To give a text an Author is to impose a limit on that text, to furnish
> it with a final signified, to close the writing. Such a conception
> suits criticism very well, the latter then allotting itself the
> important task of discovering the Author (or its hypostases: society,
> history, psyche, liberty) beneath the work: when the Author has been
> found, the text is 'explained' - victory to the critic.[5]

# Bibliography

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div id="ref-barthes_death_1977" class="csl-entry">

Barthes, Roland. “The Death of the Author.” In *Image, Music, Text*,
translated by Stephen Heath, 142–48. New York: Hill; Wang, 1977.

</div>

</div>

[1] Roland Barthes, “The Death of the Author,” in *Image, Music, Text*,
trans. Stephen Heath (New York: Hill; Wang, 1977), 145.

[2] Barthes, 146.

[3] Barthes, 147.

[4] Barthes, 145.

[5] Barthes, 147.

<div align="center">
<a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/"><img alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0" src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-nd/4.0/88x31.png" /></a><br />This work is licensed under a <a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/">Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License</a>.
</div>
