Authorship on any significant scale in the pre-modern world required
wrapping a specialized and expensive scribal infrastructure around the
figure of the author.[1] Three examples from classical and late
antiquity illustrate the possible ways in which this requirement could
be met. Cicero (†43 BCE) pursued his literary ambitions with the support
of highly skilled but unfree labor purchased out of his personal wealth,
most famously his slave and later freedman Tiro. A wealthy lay patron
named Ambrose paid for the secretarial staff that supported the
authorial activities of Origen of Alexandria (†253).[2] Quasi-monastic
members of the episcopal household of Augustine of Hippo (†430) provided
the scribal support that made his prodigious authorial output possible.
The mode of production pioneered by Augustine and his household in which
monastic labor enabled the creation of original texts by their authors
as well as the subsequent copying and circulation of finished texts
proved a durable one, and predominated in the Latin West until the
thirteenth century.[3]

Authorship of a text the size of Gratian's *Decretum* was therefore
necessarily a collaborative effort.

## Authorship

The recent work on the life of Gratian by Grebner, Winroth, and
Pennington[4] reviewed in the preceding section tacitly assumes that if
we can identify the historical Gratian, we will have identified the
author of the *Decretum* (or at least the author of the first
recension), with authorship of the text understood in a way not unlike
the way in which we might understand the authorship of a modern literary
text. (Noonan entertains a more nuanced concept of authorship, allowing
for the possibility that there might have been multiple authors.) In
conducting this kind of "quest of the historical Gratian," historians
have uncritically accepted a conceptualization of authorship that is
somewhat anachronistic when applied to a medieval text and has been
largely discarded by literary scholarship over the last half-century.

# Bibliography

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div id="ref-grebner_patronate_2007" class="csl-entry">

Grebner, Gundula. “Lay Patronate in Bologna in the first half of the
12th Century: Regular Canons, Notaries, and the Decretum.” In *Europa
und seine Regionen: 2000 Jahre Rechtsgeschichte*, edited by Andreas
Bauer and Karl H. L. Welker, 107–22. Vienna, 2007.

</div>

<div id="ref-pennington_biography_2014" class="csl-entry">

Pennington, Kenneth. “The Biography of Gratian, the Father of Canon
Law.” *Villanova Law Review* 59 (2014): 679–706.

</div>

<div id="ref-pennington_biography_2018" class="csl-entry">

———. “The Biography of Gratian, the Father of Canon Law.” In *A Service
Beyond All Recompense*, edited by Kurt Martens, 359–92. Catholic
University of America Press, 2018.

</div>

<div id="ref-winroth_where_2013" class="csl-entry">

Winroth, Anders. “Where Gratian Slept: The Life and Death of the Father
of Canon Law.” *Zeitschrift der Savigny-Stiftung für Rechtsgeschichte:
Kanonistische Abteilung* 99, no. 1 (August 2013): 105–28.

</div>

</div>

[1] Check Peter Brown, *Augustine of Hippo* and James J. O'Donnell,
*Augustine: A New Biography* to see if either of them makes the point
that scribal or secretarial support was required for individual
authorship in antiquity. The need for scribal or secretarial support
presupposes that authors create texts by dictating them.

[2] John Anthony McGuckin, "The Life of Origen (ca. 186–255)" in *The
Westminster Handbook to Origen*, 12. McGuckin got this story from
Eusebius, *Ecclesiastical History* 6.23.2.

[3] Monastic modes of text production were gradually replaced by
commercial modes of production, e.g., around the University of Paris.
See Richard H. and Mary A. Rouse, *Manuscripts and their Makers:
Commercial Book Producers in Medieval Paris 1200-1500.*

[4] Gundula Grebner, “Lay Patronate in Bologna in the first half of the
12th Century: Regular Canons, Notaries, and the Decretum,” in *Europa
und seine Regionen: 2000 Jahre Rechtsgeschichte*, ed. Andreas Bauer and
Karl H. L. Welker (Vienna, 2007), 107–22; Anders Winroth, “Where Gratian
Slept: The Life and Death of the Father of Canon Law,” *Zeitschrift der
Savigny-Stiftung für Rechtsgeschichte: Kanonistische Abteilung* 99, no.
1 (August 2013): 105–28; Kenneth Pennington, “The Biography of Gratian,
the Father of Canon Law,” *Villanova Law Review* 59 (2014): 679–706; and
Kenneth Pennington, “The Biography of Gratian, the Father of Canon Law,”
in *A Service Beyond All Recompense*, ed. Kurt Martens (Catholic
University of America Press, 2018), 359–92.
