### Authority

Modern scholars considering the authorship of a text are primarily
interested in the question of who wrote the exact words it contains and
whose thought is reflected in the arguments it makes. This dissertation
is about whether one, two, or many authors wrote the exact words in the
text of the *dicta* in the *Decretum*. The medieval sources we depend on
for much of our evidence about who wrote the *Decretum* were not
uninterested in the question of who wrote the exact words in the text,
but that question overlapped for them in a way that it does not for us
with the question of who was the source of the text's authority. The
question of the authority of the *Decretum* therefore has to be
considered separately from that of authorship.

In the middle ages, to presume to take on the role of *auctor* was to
make a claim (at least implicitly) to *auctoritas*. Medieval writers
were in general quite reticent about making claims to authority on their
own behalf, and employed a variety of techniques to maintain plausible
deniability that they were in fact claiming authorship and the authority
that went with it. Some repudiated the role of author altogether and
circulated the texts they wrote pseudonymously under the name of a
canonical author of unquestioned authority. Augustine was the
overwhelming favorite, and Gratian extensively quoted in his *de
Penitentia* from a text, *De vera et falsa penitentia*, that circulated
under such false pretences. Others sought to distance themselves from
the role of author by locating authority in texts they quoted rather
than in the original use they made of those quoted texts in their own
writing.[1] In any event, the modern notion that the ultimate source for
the authority of a text is is an independent judgement by the reader of
the validity of the arguments it contains is simply not applicable to
the twelfth century.

The problem of authorship and authority was particularly acute in the
first half of the twelfth century, because early scholastic readers were
more alert to the chinks in the armor of traditional authorities than
their less-sophisticated predecessors had been. Peter Abelard was unique
in the radicalism of his solution to the problem: in *Sic et non*, he
subverted and indeed dissolved the entire notion of authority by showing
that texts written by equally authoritative authors were in actual, not
just apparent, disagreement.

Gratian undertook the conservative hermeneutical project of harmonizing
the apparently discordant canons to the level of sophistication demanded
by a twelfth-century scholastic audience, and accordingly adopted the
strategy of locating authority in the texts that he quoted. It seems,
however, that the widespread reception of the *Decretum* as itself
authoritative benefited from an accidental feature of the text. The page
layout of early manuscripts of the *Decretum*---the placement of
Gratian's *dicta* inline with the authorities rather on the
margins---had the unintentional effect of promoting Gratian himself to
the status of an authority (or at least to a status of near-equality
with his authorities). Even though the specific page layout was probably
adopted in the 1130s or 1140s for no particular reason other than that
the conventions for the various genres of the literature of canon law
had not yet been firmly established, readers in the 1150s and 1160s seem
to have understood it, at least implicitly, as a claim to authority, a
claim that they were more than willing to accept.[2] This was almost
certainly an over-reading of the authority claim actually being made in
the *Decretum*.[3]

# Bibliography

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div id="ref-winroth_making_2000" class="csl-entry">

Winroth, Anders. *The Making of Gratian’s Decretum*. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2000.

</div>

</div>

[1] "their authority deriving mainly from the fact that they consisted
mostly of quotations" Anders Winroth, *The Making of Gratian’s Decretum*
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 191.

[2] "In the first recension, Gratian I both collected authoritative
texts and commented upon them, as did Peter Lombard in his roughly
contemporary *Sentences*. Both texts were written to meet the need for a
basic text-book in the teaching of their respective disciplines. Other
fields, such as Roman law, medicine, and biblical studies, already
possessed authoritative texts which could serve as the basis for the
teacher's commentary and interpretation. Gratian I and the Lombard were
in effect forced to create their own authoritative texts (their
authority deriving from the fact that they consisted mainly of
quotations) to be able effectively to teach their subjects. When they
did this, they had no reason to separate text from commentary. They
could not have suspected that their texts would become standard
school-texts, nor did they know that it later would become common to
keep text and commentary separate. Could they ever have guessed how
great the growth of their subjects would be after their deaths? In their
works, we can observe teachers creating tools for their own teaching
when there were as yet no standard forms for academic texts in their
subjects. The development of glosses, *summae*, *questiones*,
*distinctiones*, etc., came later, as did the awareness of teachers like
Bernard of Pavia that their compilations might become standard
school-texts (and, hence, that comments were best relegated to the
margins)." Winroth, , 191.

[3] At most, there seems to have been a limited claim of authority being
made by the authors of the first-recension *dicta* (Gratian 1) on behalf
of their *magister*, the author of the case statements (Gratian 0),
whose harmonization of the canons was authoritative for them.
