Authorship on any significant scale in the pre-modern world required
wrapping a specialized and expensive scribal infrastructure around the
figure of the author. Three examples from classical and late antiquity
illustrate the possible ways in which this requirement could be met.
Cicero pursued his literary ambitions with the support of highly skilled
but unfree labor purchased out of his personal wealth, most famously his
slave and later freedman Tiro. A wealthy patron paid for the secretarial
staff that supported the authorial activities of Origen of Alexandria
(†.253). Quasi-monastic members of the episcopal household of Augustine
of Hippo (†.430) provided the scribal support that made his prodigious
authorial output possible. The model pioneered by Augustine and his
household in which monastic labor enabled the original production of
texts by their authors as well as the subsequent copying and circulation
of finished texts proved a durable one, predominant in the Latin West
until the thirteenth century.

Authorship of a text the size of Gratian's *Decretum* was therefore
necessarily a collaborative effort.

## Gratian

The starting point for all modern scholarship on Gratian himself is John
T. Noonan Jr.'s classic 1979 *Traditio* article "Gratian slept here: The
changing identity of the father of the systematic study of canon law".
Noonan's approach is apophatic, demonstrating that there is no sound
historical basis for most of the affirmative statements, for example
that Gratian was a Camaldolese monk at the monastery of SS. Felix and
Nabor in Bologna, that many mid-twentieth century handbooks and
reference works presented as commonplace.[1]

Very little is known about the historical Gratian, and almost everything
that previous generations thought was known about Gratian has proved, on
closer examination, to be myth.[2] On the evidence found in the
*Decretum*, Gratian seems to have been less interested in contemporary
ecclesiastical or secular politics in general, and in the Investiture
Controversy (1076-1122) in particular, than some modern scholars think
he should have been. Gratian similarly seems, based on the relatively
limited use he makes in the *Decretum* of material from the *Codex* and
*Digest* of Justinian, to have been either less interested in, or less
aware of, the revival of the study of Roman law in the early twelfth
century than we think he should have been. On the other hand, he seems
to have been more aware of, and more interested in, the emergence of
scholastic theology in northern France than we can easily explain.[3]

**You do not need to exhaustively catalog all of the Gratian myths that
Noonan debunked, one is enough. As an example of his approach and
conclusions, show how Noonan debunked one of the most prominent elements
of the mythology surrounding Gratian, the claim that Gratian was a
Camaldolese monk.**

Odofredus (†1265), a professor of law at Bologna, claimed that Gratian
"was staying" (*stabat*) at the monastery of SS. Felice and Nabor while
working as a rubricator.[4] Odofredus did not indicate the basis for his
statement that Gratian had been a resident of SS. Felice and Nabor, nor
did he say that Gratian had been a monk. In 1758, Camaldolese scholars
Mittarelli and Costadono discovered papal privileges conferred in 1113
and 1153 identifying SS. Felice and Nabor as Camaldolese, and inferred
from them that the monastery--- and by extension Gratian himself---had
been Camaldolese during the intervening years. The claim that Gratian
had a connection to the Camaldolese order attracted criticism in the
eighteenth century, and fell out of favor in the nineteenth century, but
was put back into circulation in the mid-twentieth century by Van
Hove.[5]

Noonan (†2017) was a distinguished professor of law and an appellate
judge who applied the standards of evidence of the law school and the
courtroom to the historical record. **Noonan relied heavily on the legal
hearsay standard as understood and applied by twentieth-century American
courts of law as the basis for his debunking of much Gratian
mythology.** By Noonan's standards, the statement of
Odofredus---hearsay, not attributed to a source, a century after the
fact---is nothing more than legend. **Winroth, however, has questioned
whether this is an appropriate standard for evaluating historical
evidence.**

> To conclude, we have reason to believe that Gratian composed and
> commented upon a substantial portion of the Concordia. In such
> composition and commentary he revealed himself to be a teacher with
> theological knowledge and interests and a lawyer's point of view. He
> worked in Bologna in the 1130s and 1140s. Beyond these conclusions, we
> have unverified hearsay, palpable legend, and the silent figure in the
> shadows of S. Marco.[6]

**Transition: Noonan wrote before the discover of the first recension;
recent (post-1996) discussion of the identity of Gratian necessarily
focus on accounting for the existence of the first and second
recensions.**

### Winroth's argument

(**Pennington's argument is largely a response to Winroth's, discuss
Winroth's argument first, followed by Pennington's critique of and
response to it.**)

"In the interests of simplicity and clarity, I have therefore chosen to
call the author of the first recension Gratian 1 and the author of the
second recension Gratian 2. These labels are not intended to suggest
that Gratian 1 and Gratian 2 could not have been the same person."[7]

Winroth's arguments in chapters 1-5 of *The Making of Gratian's
Decretum* are agnostic as to whether Gratian 1 is the same person as
Gratian 2. The question of authorial identity is not relevant to the
primary argument that Winroth advances in those chapters, which is that
the Admont, Barcelona, and Florence manuscripts represent a coherent
first recension of the *Decretum* rather than an abbreviation. In
chapter 6 and in his conclusion, however, Winroth observes that the
second recension reflects a considerably more sophisticated legal
culture than that reflected in the first recension, notably in the
reception of concepts and terminology from the study of Roman law, and
argues that it is unlikely that one author underwent such an
intellectual evolution in a single generation.

Fourteenth International Congress of Medieval Canon Law, Toronto,
2012.[8]

Winroth interprets an entry in a Siena necrology (Siena, Biblioteca
communale degli Intronati F12, f.5r) as evidence that Gratian died as
bishop of Chiusi on the feast day of St Lawrence (August 10) in either
1144 or 1145.

### Pennington's argument

**No transition, and very incomplete**

Pennington, depending on Eichbauer, argues that because the number of
additional canons found in the margins of Bc, and in both the margins
and appendices of Fd and Aa, fall well short of the number that would be
expected if they had been copied from a Vulgate *Decretum* (87 are
missing from Aa, and 62 are missing from Fd), these manuscripts
represent an intermediate "next-to-last" stage in the development of the
*Decretum* text intermediate the pre-Vulgate and Vulgate versions.
Furthermore, the fact that the Lateran II canons *are* present in this
"next-to-last" stage undermines the argument going back to Fransen and
supported by Lenherr that the Lateran II canons are a last-minute
addition, and poorly if at all integrated into the argument of the
*Decretum*.[9]

### Gratian's teaching career

Evidence concerning Gratian's career as a teacher of canon law is
contradictory. Most medieval and modern readers of the *Decretum* have
seen it as a teaching text, both in the sense that its intended use (or
at least one of its intended uses) was as an introductory textbook, and
also in the sense that it reflected the author's experience as a
classroom teacher. On the one hand, the early manuscript tradition for
the *Decretum* displays enough variation, even among the first-recension
manuscripts Aa, Bc, Fd, and P, to suggest that the text developed
continuously over the span of, and in parallel with, a relatively long
teaching career---perhaps a decade or more. On the other hand, Gratian's
personal obscurity is so profound---Stephan Kuttner compared Gratian to
the anonymous builders of Gothic cathedrals[10]---as to suggest a short,
or even no, teaching career.[11]

Considering the fact that Gratian was universally credited as the author
of the foundational textbook for the study of canon law in the classical
period, one of the truly stellar intellectual achievements of the
renaissance of the twelfth century, his complete absence from the kinds
of academic genealogies and origin stories that Odofredus (†1265) handed
down to his own Roman law students is striking indeed.[12]

We might be better able to assess Gratian's teaching career and how it
influenced the compilation and transmission of the *Decretum* were we in
a position to positively identify at least a few of his students. Here
again, however, the evidence is mixed at best. Three twelfth-century
canonist have, with varying degrees of plausibility, been identified as
having been students of Gratian: Paucapalea (fl. 1140s), Simon of
Bisignano (fl. 1174--1179), Omnebene (d. 1185).

#### Paucapalea

Paucapalea was easily the most prominent figure from the early period of
the Bolognese school of decretists who followed in Gratian's immediate
footsteps. Pennington flatly states that Paucapalea was "\[a\] pupil of
Gratian and the author of the first commentary on the Decretum".[13] But
in the preface to that commentary, Paucapalea does not refer to Gratian
by name: "*Magistri autem hoc opus condentis ipsa decreta sunt materia.*
The decrees themselves, however, are the subject matter of the master
producing this work."[14]

The omission is potentially significant. Prefaces to academic books in
the twelfth century formed a recognized genre with well-established
conventions. In an age resistant to any attempt by the human present to
appropriate the authority of the divinely-inspired past, a commentator
like Paucapalea would have been expected to offer an explicit statement
in his preface affirming the authority of both the work commented on and
its author. If Paucapalea had had something to say about the authority
of Gratian, his readers would have expected him to do so in his preface.
That he did not suggests that he may not have known enough about Gratian
to credibly do so.[15]

Furthermore, Paucapalea in the preface to his *summa* clearly shows both
that he is aware of the third part of the *Decretum*, *de
Consecratione*, and that he uncritically accepts it as having been
compiled by the same Master responsible for the rest of the work: "*In
extremis de ecclesiarum dedicatione et corpore et sanguine domini atque
baptismo nec non et confirmatione pleniter tractat, et in his suum
tractatum terminat.* In the end, he treats fully the dedication of
churches, the body and blood of the Lord, baptism, and also
confirmation, and with these things concludes his treatise."[16]

If Rambaud is correct that *de Consecratione* was not part of the
original *Decretum*, the fact that Paucapalea attributed it to the same
unnamed master responsible for rest of the text on which he was
commenting strongly suggests that he did not have direct knowledge of
Gratian or his plan of work.

#### Omnibonus or Omnebene

Omnibonus or Omnebene (d.1185) composed an abbreviation (*summa*?
abridged version?) of the *Decretum* in the 1150s.[17] The basis for the
claim that Omnebene was a student of Gratian is an entry for the year
1130 in the chronicle of Norman monk Robert of Torigni (†1186)

> *Gratianus episcopus Clusinus coadunavit decreta valde utilia ex
> decretis, canonibus, doctoribus, legibus Romanis, sufficientia ad
> omnes ecclesiasticas causas decidendas, que frequentantur in curia
> Romana et in aliis curiis ecclesiasticis. Hec postmodum abbreviavit
> magister Omnebonum episcopus Veronensis, qui fuerat eius discipulus.*
> (Gratian bishop of Chiusi brought together very useful decrees out of
> decrees, canons, doctors, Roman laws, sufficient for deciding all
> ecclesiastical cases, which are resorted to at the Roman curia and in
> other ecclesiastical courts. Master Omnebonum bishop of Verona, who
> had been his student, afterwards abbreviated them.)[18]

Although the evidence of Robert's chronicle is by Noonan's standard
hearsay, Robert's reputation as a well-informed source concerning
Gratian has improved in recent years since the Siena necrology has made
the identification of Gratian as bishop of Chiusi more probable.

The dates do not preclude Omnebene's having been a student of Gratian.
Although Omnebene lived into the 1180s, the abbreviation itself seems to
date from the 1150s, perhaps a decade after the end of whatever teaching
career Gratian may have had, and at precisely the moment that
continent-wide interest in the text was increasing most rapidly.

**Is there any internal evidence in Omnebene's abbreviation that Gratian
was his teacher? Cite recent editions of Omnebene's abbreviation.**

#### Simon of Bisignano

Simon of Bisignano (fl. 1174--1179) was the author of a *Summa
decretorum* dated c.1177-79, and a number of glosses on the *Decretum*
are attributed to him.[19] The evidence that Simon of Bisignano was a
student of Gratian’s comes from references within his writings.[20]
Simon refers to himself as *discipulus* and to Gratian as *magister* in
at least two places in his *Summa* (**Landau says "frequently"**). There
is, however a hiatus of almost four decades between the latest plausible
date for the end of Gratian's teaching career, and the documentary
evidence we have for Simon's professional career as a canonist. Although
it is not chronologically impossible for Simon to have been Gratian's
student, it seems more likely that he described himself as *discipulus*
in something like the same sense that we might describe contemporary
scholars like Chodorow, Pennington, and Winroth as "students of
Gratian".

### Epilogue

By the beginning of the thirteenth century, the systematic study of
canon law had evolved in a direction of which its father Gratian would
probably not have approved, and which he may even have had difficulty
recognizing as the same practical or applied branch of theology his own
work presupposed it to be. After around 1190, the attention of both
academic and practicing canonists decisively turned away from
theological jurisprudence in the tradition of Gratian, based on a rich
collection of scriptural, patristic, conciliar, and papal source texts,
and towards a much more narrowly circumscribed technical jurisprudence
focused exclusively on contemporary papal decretals.

# Bibliography

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div id="ref-van_hove_prolegomena_1945" class="csl-entry">

Hove, Alphonse van. *Prolegomena ad Codicem iuris canonici*. Editio
artera auctior et emendatior. Commentarium Lovaniense in Codicem iuris
canonici, v. 1, t. 1. Mechlinae: H. Dessain, 1945.

</div>

<div id="ref-hunt_introductions_1980" class="csl-entry">

Hunt, Richard William. “The Introductions to the ’Artes’ in the Twelfth
Century.” In *The History of Grammar in the Middle Ages: Collected
Papers*, edited by G. L. Bursill-Hall, 117–44. Amsterdam Studies in the
Theory and History of Linguistic Science. Series 3: Studies in the
History of Linguistics v.5. Amsterdam: J. Benjamins, 1980.

</div>

<div id="ref-kuttner_research_1990" class="csl-entry">

Kuttner, Stephan. “Research on Gratian: Acta and Agenda.” In *Studies in
the History of Medieval Canon Law*. Collected Studies CS325. Aldershot,
Hampshire, Great Britain : Brookfield, Vt., USA: Variorum ; Gower, 1990.

</div>

<div id="ref-kuttner_father_1941" class="csl-entry">

———. “The Father of the Science of Canon Law.” *Jurist* 1 (1941): 2–19.

</div>

<div id="ref-luscombe_abelard_1969" class="csl-entry">

Luscombe, D. E. “Abelard and the Decretum of Gratian.” In *The School of
Peter Abelard: The Influence of Abelard’s Thought in the Early
Scholastic Period*, 214–23. Cambridge Studies in Medieval Life and
Thought, new series, v. 14. London: Cambridge U.P, 1969.

</div>

<div id="ref-minnis_medieval_1988" class="csl-entry">

Minnis, A. J. *Medieval Theory of Authorship: Scholastic Literary
Attitudes in the Later Middle Ages*. 2nd ed. Middle Ages Series.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1988.

</div>

<div id="ref-noonan_gratian_1979" class="csl-entry">

Noonan, John T. “Gratian Slept Here: The Changing Identity of the Father
of the Systematic Study of Canon Law.” *Traditio* 35 (January 1979):
145–72.

</div>

<div id="ref-pennington_biography_2014" class="csl-entry">

Pennington, Kenneth. “The Biography of Gratian, the Father of Canon
Law.” *Villanova Law Review* 59 (2014): 679–706.

</div>

<div id="ref-radding_origins_1988" class="csl-entry">

Radding, Charles. *The Origins of Medieval Jurisprudence: Pavia and
Bologna, 850- 1150*. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1988.

</div>

<div id="ref-rufinus_summa_1963" class="csl-entry">

Rufinus. *Summa Decretorum*. Edited by Heinrich Singer. Aalen :
Paderborn: Scientia Verlag ; F. Schöningh, 1963.

</div>

<div id="ref-paucapalea_summa_1890" class="csl-entry">

Schulte, Johann Friedrich von, ed. *Die Summa des Paucapalea über das
Decretum Gratiani*. Giessen: E. Roth, 1890.

</div>

<div id="ref-simon_of_bisignano_summa_2014" class="csl-entry">

Simon of Bisignano. *Summa in Decretum Simonis Bisinianensis*. Edited by
Pier Virginio Aimone-Braida. Monumenta Iuris Canonici. Series A, Corpus
Glossatorum ; Vol. 8. Città del Vaticano: Biblioteca Apostolica
Vaticana, 2014.

</div>

<div id="ref-somerville_prefaces_1998" class="csl-entry">

Somerville, Robert, and Bruce Clark Brasington, eds. *Prefaces to Canon
Law Books in Latin Christianity: Selected Translations, 500-1245*. New
Haven, Conn: Yale University Press, 1998.

</div>

<div id="ref-southern_scholastic_1995" class="csl-entry">

Southern, R. W. *Scholastic Humanism and the Unification of Europe*.
Vol. 1. Oxford, UK ; Cambridge, Mass., USA: Blackwell, 1995.

</div>

<div id="ref-weigand_development_2008" class="csl-entry">

Weigand, Rudolf. “The Development of the Glossa Ordinaria to Gratian’s
Decretum.” In *The History of Medieval Canon Law in the Classical
Period, 1140-1234: From Gratian to the Decretals of Pope Gregory IX*,
edited by Wilfried Hartmann and Kenneth Pennington, 55–97. History of
Medieval Canon Law. Washington, D.C: Catholic University of America
Press, 2008.

</div>

<div id="ref-winroth_making_2000" class="csl-entry">

Winroth, Anders. *The Making of Gratian’s Decretum*. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2000.

</div>

<div id="ref-winroth_where_2013" class="csl-entry">

———. “Where Gratian Slept: The Life and Death of the Father of Canon
Law.” *Zeitschrift der Savigny-Stiftung für Rechtsgeschichte:
Kanonistische Abteilung* 99, no. 1 (August 2013): 105–28.

</div>

</div>

[1] John T. Noonan, “Gratian Slept Here: The Changing Identity of the
Father of the Systematic Study of Canon Law,” *Traditio* 35 (January
1979): 145–72.

[2] Noonan.

[3] See (Stephan Kuttner, “The Father of the Science of Canon Law,”
*Jurist* 1 (1941): 2–19). Kuttner argues that Gratian applied Ivo's
program as it had been developed in the intervening forty years by
scholastic theology, most notably by Abelard, and not in its original
form: scholastic theology got the program from Ivo, Gratian got it from
scholastic theology. See also (D. E. Luscombe, “Abelard and the Decretum
of Gratian.” in *The School of Peter Abelard: The Influence of Abelard’s
Thought in the Early Scholastic Period*, Cambridge Studies in Medieval
Life and Thought, new series, v. 14 (London: Cambridge U.P, 1969),
214–23) and \[Anders Winroth, “Where Gratian Slept: The Life and Death
of the Father of Canon Law,” *Zeitschrift der Savigny-Stiftung für
Rechtsgeschichte: Kanonistische Abteilung* 99, no. 1 (August 2013):
105–28, 111

[4] Noonan identifies Odofredus as the source for associating Gratian
with SS. Felix and Nabor (Noonan, “Gratian Slept Here”, 148), but cf. R.
W. Southern, *Scholastic Humanism and the Unification of Europe*, vol. 1
(Oxford, UK ; Cambridge, Mass., USA: Blackwell, 1995), 286n5. Southern
draws attention to an inscription found in a Geneva manuscript of the
*Decretum*, Bibliothèque publique et universitaire, MS Lat. 60: *Anno
domini MCL a Gratiano S. Feliciani Bononiensis monacho editum*.
Pennington does not identify the manuscript as one known to date from
the twelfth century (see Kenneth Pennington,
[Gratianus](http://amesfoundation.law.harvard.edu/BioBibCanonists/Report_Biobib2.php?record_id=a242),
*Bio-Bibliographical Guide to Medieval and Early Modern Jurists*), and
of course there is no way of knowing how long after the manuscript was
produced the inscription was added. The value of the inscription as
independent evidence attesting to a connection between Gratian and SS.
Felix and Nabor is therefore unknown, but it is possible that it
predates Odofredus.

[5] **Cite Noonan, “Gratian Slept Here”, but also cite Alphonse van
Hove, *Prolegomena ad Codicem iuris canonici*, Editio artera auctior et
emendatior, Commentarium Lovaniense in Codicem iuris canonici, v. 1, t.
1 (Mechlinae: H. Dessain, 1945).** Van Hove's *Prolegomena* had an
outsized impact on the trajectory of medieval canon law studies in
twentieth century North America because of its having been used by the
1964 Yale seminar led by Peter Landau in the absence of Stephan Kuttner,
who was undergoing treatment for cancer at the time. Seminar
participants including Charles Donahue and Robert Somerville went on to
have unusually influential academic careers in the field (Donahue at
Harvard, and Somerville at Columbia where he was Winroth's dissertation
advisor).

[6] Noonan, “Gratian Slept Here,” 172.

[7] Anders Winroth, *The Making of Gratian’s Decretum* (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2000), 122.

[8] Winroth, “Where Gratian Slept.”

[9] Kenneth Pennington, “The Biography of Gratian, the Father of Canon
Law,” *Villanova Law Review* 59 (2014): 686.

[10] "He is one of those deeply admirable men of pious modesty, like the
builders of the medieval cathedrals, whose person is hidden and effaced
completely behind their immortal works." (Kuttner, “The Father of the
Science of Canon Law,” 4).

[11] **Expand: Winroth argues for a short teaching career, Southern
agues for no teaching career.** R.W. Southern is the extreme outlier in
this regard, citing as late as 1995 Gratian's supposed association with
the Camaldolese order to advance an argument that he had never been a
teacher: "Reliable writers after his death affirmed that Gratian was a
Benedictine monk of the Camaldolesian Order, a small Italian branch of
the Benedictines, which combined austerity of life with considerable
freedom to contribute to the work of the Church in a wide variety of
ways. This is what Gratian did. He engaged in a very un-monastic branch
of study, and produced a law book which became the most widely
distributed and probably most generally used of all the masterpieces of
twelfth-century learning." "the book, and not the teaching of pupils,
was the offering Gratian's monastic life brought to the Church".
(Southern, *Scholastic Humanism and the Unification of Europe*,
1:286–87, 304). Southern also asserts that no one claims to have been
Gratian's student---"none of the earliest users of his work claims to
have been taught by him". "although other scholars made some very early
alterations and additions to the text of the *Decretum*, none of them
claimed to have been taught by him." (Southern, 1:287, 304). **Does
Southern provide footnotes to support these statements?**

[12] **Expand:** The tradition of Roman law teaching in Bologna
preserved an elaborate genealogy of masters and their students: Pepo
preceded Wernerius \[Irnerius\], who taught the Four Doctors. Odofredus
is an important source for this tradition, and his remarks about
Irnerius can be found in his commentary on *Dig.* 1.1.6. Odofredus,
*Lectura super Digesto veteri*, (2 volumes, Lyon: 1550-1552; repr.
Bologna 1967-1968). For a short excerpt from the Latin text with
accompanying English translation, see (Charles Radding, *The Origins of
Medieval Jurisprudence: Pavia and Bologna, 850- 1150* (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1988), 159–60) **See also Pennington "Big Bang".**
Note that Odofredus is also the source for associating Gratian with the
monastery of SS. Felix and Nabor. (Noonan, “Gratian Slept Here,” 148).

[13] Kenneth Pennington,
[Paucapalea](http://amesfoundation.law.harvard.edu/BioBibCanonists/Report_Biobib2.php?record_id=a366),
*Bio-Bibliographical Guide to Medieval and Early Modern Jurists.*

[14]  (Johann Friedrich von Schulte, ed., *Die Summa des Paucapalea über
das Decretum Gratiani* (Giessen: E. Roth, 1890), 3) (Robert Somerville
and Bruce Clark Brasington, eds., *Prefaces to Canon Law Books in Latin
Christianity: Selected Translations, 500-1245* (New Haven, Conn: Yale
University Press, 1998), 184) Indeed, based on a search through the OCR
text layer of a PDF file scanned from the Schulte edition and provided
to me by Ken Pennington, Paucapalea appears not to refer to Gratian by
name anywhere in his *summa*.

[15] **Going to need a very heavyweight footnote here referencing
Minnis.** (A. J. Minnis, *Medieval Theory of Authorship: Scholastic
Literary Attitudes in the Later Middle Ages*, 2nd ed, Middle Ages Series
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1988)) (Richard William
Hunt, “The Introductions to the ’Artes’ in the Twelfth Century,” in *The
History of Grammar in the Middle Ages: Collected Papers*, ed. G. L.
Bursill-Hall, Amsterdam Studies in the Theory and History of Linguistic
Science. Series 3: Studies in the History of Linguistics v.5 (Amsterdam:
J. Benjamins, 1980), 117–44)

[16]  (Schulte, *Die Summa des Paucapalea über das Decretum Gratiani*,
3) (Somerville and Brasington, *Prefaces to Canon Law Books in Latin
Christianity*, 184–85)

[17] Kenneth Pennington,
[Omnibonus](http://amesfoundation.law.harvard.edu/BioBibCanonists/Report_Biobib2.php?record_id=a363),
*Bio-Bibliographical Guide to Medieval and Early Modern Jurists.*

[18] Kuttner, *Repertorium*, 453. MGH Scriptores (SS) 6 (1844), 490.
*Chronique de Robert de Torigny*, ed. Léopold Delisle, 183-184 (see BSB
online version). *Chronicles of the reigns of Stephen, Henry II, and
Richard I*, ed. Richard Howlett (1884). *Chronica Roberti de Torigneio*,
ed. Richard Howlett, RS 82 4.118.

[19] Kenneth Pennington, [Simon of
Bisignano](http://amesfoundation.law.harvard.edu/BioBibCanonists/Report_Biobib2.php?record_id=a497),
*Bio-Bibliographical Guide to Medieval and Early Modern Jurists.*
Pennington does not indicate that Simon of Bisignano was a student of
Gratian. Glosses attributed to Simon of Bisignano are indicated by the
*sigla* s., si., and sy. (Rudolf Weigand, “The Development of the Glossa
Ordinaria to Gratian’s Decretum,” in *The History of Medieval Canon Law
in the Classical Period, 1140-1234: From Gratian to the Decretals of
Pope Gregory IX*, ed. Wilfried Hartmann and Kenneth Pennington, History
of Medieval Canon Law (Washington, D.C: Catholic University of America
Press, 2008), 97) **Simon's glosses are dated earlier than his *Summa*
(cite Hartmann and Pennington).**

[20] Stephan Kuttner, “Research on Gratian: Acta and Agenda,” in
*Studies in the History of Medieval Canon Law*, Collected Studies CS325
(Aldershot, Hampshire, Great Britain : Brookfield, Vt., USA: Variorum ;
Gower, 1990), 7. Noonan, “Gratian Slept Here”, 157, rejects this, but
Kuttner disagrees. Simon of Bisignano refers to Gratian as *magister*
and to himself as *discipulus* in his comments on C.27 q.2, Simon of
Bisignano, *Summa in Decretum Simonis Bisinianensis*, ed. Pier Virginio
Aimone-Braida, Monumenta Iuris Canonici. Series A, Corpus Glossatorum ;
Vol. 8 (Città del Vaticano: Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, 2014), 412.
Simon again refers to Gratian as *magister* in his comments on D.4 c.31
of *de Consecratione* Simon of Bisignano, *Summa in Decretum Simonis
Bisinianensis*, 542. **Page numbers may not coincide with print edition
cited: the version of the Aimone edition I have access to is a PDF dated
Fribourg 2007. BibTex records in merged.bib are inconsistent as to
whether to use the author's or editor's name as the basis for the tag.**

<CAVSA XXVII>  
&lt;Q.II&gt; § *Sequitur secunda questio*  
Sacram et authenticam pie recordationis Gratianus de matrimonio
distinctionem composuit, quam quidam inanis glorie aucupes fecere
bifrontem et simplicium potibus inuidentes more seuorum animalium aquas
limpidas turbauerunt. Gratianus uero, canonum habita notitia et mente
perspecta, dixit inter sponsum et sponsam esse matrimonium, sed
initiatum; inter uirum et uxorem consummatum. Sed quoniam non est
discipulus super magistrum nec debet securis contra eum qui secat
gloriari timemus os nostrum in celum mittere et eum reprehendere cuius
non sumus digni soluere corrigiam calceamenti.

Note that the phrase "sed inanis glorie aucupes fecere bifrontem" also
occurs in Rufinus's treatment of the same question, C.27 q.2. (Rufinus,
*Summa Decretorum*, ed. Heinrich Singer (Aalen : Paderborn: Scientia
Verlag ; F. Schöningh, 1963), 440).

Gratian of pious remembrance composed a sacred and *authenticam*
distinction concerning marriage, *quam quidam inanis glorie aucupes
fecere bifrontem* and not seeing with the drinks of the simple, \[they\]
troubled clear waters in the manner of *seuorum* animals. But Gratian
*habita notitia* of the canon and *mente perspecta*, said that matrimony
is between spouse and spouse, but having been consecrated (*initiatum*),
is consummated between husband and wife. But since the disciple is not
above his master (Matthew 10:24, Luke 6:40), and the axe (*securis*)
ought not boast (*gloriari*) against him who cuts (*secat*) (Isaiah
10:15), we fear to send our mouth into heaven (Psalm 72:9?) and to find
fault with him the string (*corrigiam*) of whose shoes we are not worthy
to loosen (John 1:27) (PLE).

<DISTINCTIO IIII>  
31. *Solet queri*  
Quod quamuis Magister noster docuerit, nos tamen in hoc nolumus eum
imitari.

Although our master taught that, we nevertheless do not wish to imitate
him in this (PLE).
