### Gratian's teaching career

Evidence concerning Gratian's career as a teacher of canon law is
contradictory. On the one hand, the early manuscript tradition for the
*Decretum* displays enough variation, even among the first-recension
manuscripts Aa, Bc, Fd, and P, to suggest that the text developed
continuously over the span of, and in parallel with, a relatively long
teaching career---perhaps a decade or more. On the other hand, Gratian's
personal obscurity is so profound---Stephan Kuttner compared Gratian to
the anonymous builders of Gothic cathedrals[1]---as to suggest a short,
or even no, teaching career.[2]

Considering the fact that Gratian was universally credited as the author
of the foundational textbook for the study of canon law in the classical
period, one of the truly stellar intellectual achievements of the
renaissance of the twelfth century, his complete absence from the kinds
of academic genealogies and origin stories that Odofredus (†1265) handed
down to his own Roman law students is striking indeed.[3]

We might be better able to assess Gratian's teaching career and how it
influenced the compilation and transmission of the *Decretum* were we in
a position to positively identify at least a few of his students. Here
again, however, the evidence is mixed at best.

### Epilogue

By the beginning of the thirteenth century, the systematic study of
canon law had evolved in a direction of which its father Gratian would
probably not have approved, and which he may even have had difficulty
recognizing as the same practical or applied branch of theology his own
work presupposed it to be. After around 1190, the attention of both
academic and practicing canonists decisively turned away from
theological jurisprudence in the tradition of Gratian, based on a rich
collection of scriptural, patristic, conciliar, and papal source texts,
and towards a much more narrowly circumscribed technical jurisprudence
focused exclusively on contemporary papal decretals.

<!--

    <CAVSA XXVII> <Q.II> § *Sequitur secunda questio* Sacram et
    authenticam pie recordationis Gratianus de matrimonio distinctionem
    composuit, quam quidam inanis glorie aucupes fecere bifrontem
    et simplicium potibus inuidentes more seuorum animalium aquas
    limpidas turbauerunt. Gratianus uero, canonum habita notitia
    et mente perspecta, dixit inter sponsum et sponsam esse
    matrimonium, sed initiatum; inter uirum et uxorem consummatum.
    Sed quoniam non est discipulus super magistrum nec debet securis
    contra eum qui secat gloriari timemus os nostrum in celum mittere
    et eum reprehendere cuius non sumus digni soluere corrigiam
    calceamenti.

    Note that the phrase "sed inanis glorie aucupes fecere bifrontem"
    also occurs in Rufinus's treatment of the same question, C.27
    q.2. [@rufinus_summa_1963, 440].

    Gratian of pious remembrance composed a sacred and *authenticam*
    distinction concerning marriage, *quam quidam inanis glorie
    aucupes fecere bifrontem* and not seeing with the drinks of the
    simple, [they] troubled clear waters in the manner of *seuorum*
    animals. But Gratian *habita notitia* of the canon and *mente
    perspecta*, said that matrimony is between spouse and spouse,
    but having been consecrated (*initiatum*), is consummated between
    husband and wife. But since the disciple is not above his master
    (Matthew 10:24, Luke 6:40), and the axe (*securis*) ought not
    boast (*gloriari*) against him who cuts (*secat*) (Isaiah 10:15),
    we fear to send our mouth into heaven (Psalm 72:9?) and to find
    fault with him the string (*corrigiam*) of whose shoes we are
    not worthy to loosen (John 1:27) (PLE).

    <DISTINCTIO IIII> 31. *Solet queri* Quod quamuis Magister noster
    docuerit, nos tamen in hoc nolumus eum imitari.

    Although our master taught that, we nevertheless do not wish
    to imitate him in this (PLE).

  -->

# Bibliography

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div id="ref-kuttner_father_1941" class="csl-entry">

Kuttner, Stephan. “The Father of the Science of Canon Law.” *Jurist* 1
(1941): 2–19.

</div>

<div id="ref-noonan_gratian_1979" class="csl-entry">

Noonan, John T. “Gratian Slept Here: The Changing Identity of the Father
of the Systematic Study of Canon Law.” *Traditio* 35 (January 1979):
145–72.

</div>

<div id="ref-radding_origins_1988" class="csl-entry">

Radding, Charles. *The Origins of Medieval Jurisprudence: Pavia and
Bologna, 850- 1150*. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1988.

</div>

</div>

[1] "He is one of those deeply admirable men of pious modesty, like the
builders of the medieval cathedrals, whose person is hidden and effaced
completely behind their immortal works." (Stephan Kuttner, “The Father
of the Science of Canon Law,” *Jurist* 1 (1941): 4).

[2] **Winroth argues for a short teaching career, Southern argues for no
teaching career.**

[3] **Expand:** The tradition of Roman law teaching in Bologna preserved
an elaborate genealogy of masters and their students: Pepo preceded
Wernerius \[Irnerius\], who taught the Four Doctors. Odofredus is an
important source for this tradition, and his remarks about Irnerius can
be found in his commentary on *Dig.* 1.1.6. Odofredus, *Lectura super
Digesto veteri*, (2 volumes, Lyon: 1550-1552; repr. Bologna 1967-1968).
For a short excerpt from the Latin text with accompanying English
translation, see (Charles Radding, *The Origins of Medieval
Jurisprudence: Pavia and Bologna, 850- 1150* (New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1988), 159–60) **See also Pennington "Big Bang".** Note that
Odofredus is also the source for associating Gratian with the monastery
of Saints Felix and Nabor. (John T. Noonan, “Gratian Slept Here: The
Changing Identity of the Father of the Systematic Study of Canon Law,”
*Traditio* 35 (January 1979): 148).

<div align="center">
<a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/"><img alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0" src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-nd/4.0/88x31.png" /></a><br />This work is licensed under a <a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/">Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License</a>.
</div>
