
In the middle ages, to presume to take on the role of *auctor* was
to make a claim (at least implicitly) to *auctoritas*. Medieval
writers were in general quite reticent about making claims to
authority on their own behalf, and employed a variety of techniques
to maintain plausible deniability that they were in fact claiming
authorship and the authority that went with it. Some repudiated the
role of author altogether and circulated the texts they wrote
pseudonymously under the name of a canonical author of unquestioned
authority. Augustine was the overwhelming favorite, and Gratian
extensively quoted in his *de Penitentia* from a text, *De vera et
falsa penitentia*, that circulated under such false pretences.
Others sought to distance themselves from the role of author by
locating authority in texts they quoted rather than in the original
use they made of those quoted texts in their own writing.[^11] In
any event, the modern notion that the ultimate source for the
authority of a text is is an independent judgement by the reader
of the validity of the arguments it contains is simply not applicable
to the twelfth century.

The problem of authorship and authority was particularly acute in
the first half of the twelfth century, because early scholastic
readers were more alert to the chinks in the armor of traditional
authorities than their less-sophisticated predecessors had been.
Peter Abelard was unique in the radicalism of his solution to the
problem: in *Sic et non*, he subverted and indeed dissolved the
entire notion of authority by showing that texts written by equally
authoritative authors were in actual, not just apparent, disagreement.

