<!-- Headline -->

The case statements or *themata* were written by a single author whose
words appear nowhere else in the *Decretum*. In the spirit of Winroth,
who refers to his hypothesized author of the second-recension *dicta* as
Gratian 2, I have named this figure Gratian 0, and I take him to be
*the* historical Gratian.

How to make sense of this result?

<!-- Chapter 1 -->

The most important take-way from Chapter 1 on the legal revolution of
the twelfth century, the background from which the *Decretum* emerges,
is that it is as much a social as an intellectual movement. My thinking
in reconceptualizing the canon law strand of the legal revolution of the
twelfth century as a social movement (as opposed to an intellectual
movement, as it is usually treated in the scholarly literature) was
strongly influenced by Rodney Stark's *The Rise of Christianity*.
Thinking of the growth of the systematic study of canon law as a social
movement has two significant implications.

First, social movements of this kind display a pattern of long-tail
exponential growth in which, for a very long time, the number of people
involved is quite small. As a result, evidence of their activities
emerges into the historical record only after a considerable delay. The
Marturi placitum (1076) is evidence that the Roman law strand of the
legal revolution, at least, had a lengthy prehistory (the long tail)
before it broke the surface into historical visibility thirty years
later in the first decade of the twelfth century. The results of the
collective efforts of the circle we associate with the name of Gratian
(*Gratian-Kreis*?) emerge into our field of view only after 1140, at
which point it is not unreasonable to believe that they had been at work
in some form or another for two if not three decades. (Pennington has
argued for a long period of textual development for the *Decretum*,
while Winroth has argued that Roman and canon law studies were nowhere
near as fully developed by the end of the 1130s as previously
thought. These arguments have been thought of as being at odds, not
least by Pennington and Winroth themselves, but I prefer to think of
them as intuitions, from different starting points, of the same process
of long-tail exponential growth, and therefore in some sense both
right.)

Second, participation in the early stages of a successful social
movement confers substantial real-world benefits. Participation in the
circle we associate with the name of Gratian undoubtedly involved a
considerable amount of uncompensated scribal labor, and in order to
explain the exponential growth pattern, there must have been some
substantial real-world benefit that made the effort worthwhile for the
participants. It is not at all hard to guess what that benefit was. The
participants were not interested in teaching as a career. They were
looking for competitive advantage in the race for ecclesiastical
benefices. When preferment came their way, their involvement in
Gratian's project probably ended. But the fact that they had been
successful attracted others to take their place.

<!-- Chapters 2 and 3 -->

The statement that Gratian is the author of the *Decretum* is a
convenient shorthand in which the *Decretum* as a whole stands
synecdochically for the *dicta*. Gratian scholars are in no danger of
being mislead by this shorthand. But they are in danger of being mislead
by the implied statement that Gratian is the author of the *dicta*.

Scholarship on the *Decretum* in the aftermath of Noonan's debunking of
the traditional Gratian legendary and Winroth's discovery of the first
recension has taken for granted that either one or two authors wrote the
*dicta*. When I started work on this project in 2013, I implicitly
accepted that assumption and fully expected stylometric results for the
*dicta* consistent with either Pennington's one-author hypothesis or
Winroth's two-author hypothesis. My intention was to expand what I
perceived to be an insufficient evidentiary basis for the debate over
whether the *dicta* had one or two authors. However the results, once I
convinced myself that they were not spurious, convinced me that the
individual *dicta* have to be distinguished from the collection as a
whole and that it is not consistent with the stylometric evidence to
think of the collection as a work of literature written by either a
single author or two authors.

The *dicta* are more coherent than a gloss collection but less coherent
than a treatise. What we have is a collection of texts and what we need
is some idea of how that collection was composed. Much of the
post-Noonan scholarship on the authorship of the *Decretum* has engaged
in what I have referred to as a "quest of the historical Gratian."
However it appears that to search for one or more historical Gratians
behind the collection of *dicta* is to ask a question that is incapable
of producing a meaningful answer.

<!--

locality of reference

  -->

------------------------------------------------------------------------

> The historical Gratian may have created a collection of canons used in
> the earliest course on canon law and may have written a few of the
> comments that are now part of the collection of dicta ...

True, but I think we have to be very careful about precisely what we
mean when we say that Gratian "created a collection of canons" and that
the collection was "used in the earliest course on canon law."

I think it's safe to say that the historical Gratian was, when he
started the project, someone who had carefully read around a half-dozen
important reform-era formal source collections. He was aware in a
general way of how the new schools in Northern France approached textual
problems, and in particular of the hermeneutical approach to reading the
canons outlined in Ivo's Prologue but "left as an exercise to the
reader." I think it's also important to note that one of the things
Gratian brings to the project from the outset is a fundamentally
conservative and optimistic disposition: his is the antithesis of Peter
Abelard's bad-boy project of subverting and even dissolving the whole
notion of authority by showing that the authorities are in actual, not
just apparent, disagreement. (With respect to the optimistic outlook
that he brought to his engagement with the authorities, I think
depictions of Gratian smiling in Paradiso 10.103 and in that 18th
century engraving Anders has popularized all over the internet do
actually capture something important about him.)

At some point in the 1120s, Gratian became the convener of a study group
that read the canons, and started to work out a systematic jurisprudence
based on them. The formation of the study group was obviously a crucial
step in the development of canon law as a discipline, but I think it's
something of an anachronism to call it "the earliest course on canon
law." I think we can infer that Gratian at this point had a good command
of the raw material, but he was not yet in possession of a
fully-developed method for solving problems presented by the canons that
he could systematically impart to students. He does not at this stage
know so much more than the other participants that we can unambiguously
call him *magister* and them *discipuli*.

One of the most important things the formation of the study-group does
for Gratian is provide him with a pool of volunteer labor that makes it
possible to put on parchment the collection of canons he thinks raise
the really interesting issues and his comments on them. Before the
formation of the study group, I doubt that the collection of canons and
comments had an existence outside of Gratian's head. I'll get into what
I think is in it for the volunteer contributors, and why it matters,
below (short answer: a competitive advantage in the arms-race for
ecclesiastical benefices).

> ... but the collection of dicta as a whole grew to its classical form
> over several decades.

True.

> Some of it could have come from teachers other than the original
> one—presumably Gratian—and some of it from students summarizing or
> capitulating what their teacher said in class.

Yes, although for the reasons that I mentioned above, I'm a little
uncomfortable with using the language of teacher and student to describe
the relationship between Gratian and the contributors at the very
earliest stages (1120s) of the project. I think by the mid-1130s, we can
think of the ongoing activity around Gratian as having evolved from
being a reading or study group (Gratian-Kreis?) into something more like
a course or even a loose proto-faculty. Gratian would not have been the
only teacher, some of the earliest contributors (those still hanging
around Bologna awaiting a suitable benefice) would have to have had
students of their own by that point.

> I think your work leads us to a new model of how the classical form of
> the Decretum came to be. It started with a collection of canons
> organized into topical segments. It then grew both by having canons
> and topics added to the corpus and by accumulating commentary (dicta).
> The further questions are: When did the process start?

The 1120s.

> What role did the person later identified as Gratian play in the
> evolution of the text?

The person later identified as Gratian performed two distinct roles in
the evolution of the text of the first recension.

First, he appears to be the author of the case statements in the literal
sense of having formulated their exact wording. In his capacity as
literal author of the case statement, I refer to him elsewhere in my
dissertation as Gratian 0, as opposed to Anders's Gratian 1 and Gratian
2. Unlike Gratian 1 and Gratian 2, Gratian 0 is clearly one person. The
case statements were textually quite stable from an early stage in the
project (only 13 words were added, to C.19 d.init., in the second
recension). I don't think, however, that they predated the formation of
the study group. Rather, I think that Gratian developed them alongside
the earliest group readings.

<!--

Why did Gratian 0 make no direct contribution to the text of the
*Decretum* other than the case statements or *themata*? I suspect
that it was because his written Latin was not as good as that of
other members of the study group. (See discussion in Chapter 3
*supra* of the use of reflexives in C.3 d.init. and C.29 d.init.)
I think it is natural to assume that Gratian was older than the
other members of the study group: teachers are, after all, usually
older than their students. Stipulating to Winroth's argument that
the Siena necrology indicates that Gratian died on 10 August 1144
or 1145 as bishop of Chiusi, and guessing that he was probably
around age 60 at the time of his death, means that Gratian would
have received the early Latin grammar-intensive portions of his
education before 1100. That may not have been enough to keep up
with his students as the standards of Latin composition rose as the
twelfth century advanced.

[As an aside, I think the anomalous Latin was what most convinced
Anders that I was onto something after I told him that the case
statements were not written by the same author(s) who wrote the
first-recension dicta. He was non-committal the first time I presented
my results to him in 2013 or 2014, but at the Stephan Kuttner
Institute event at Yale in 2015 he told me he was convinced because
"ever since you pointed that out to me, I've noticed that his Latin
is just not that good."]

  -->

The person later identified as Gratian does seem, however, to have been
the thinker whose methods, arguments, and solutions came to be
memorialized in the first-recension *dicta*. This was the second, and
probably more important, role that Gratian played in the evolution of
the text of the first recension. That's not to say that his methods,
arguments, and solutions weren't worked out in the context of the study
group, but members of the group clearly accepted Gratian's
reconciliation of the canons as authoritative for them, and passed down
to later students of canon law the understanding that Gratian was the
author of the *Decretum* in the sense that it was his authority that lay
behind the particular reading of the canons the collection embodied.

> How long did that person called Gratian continue to contribute to the
> work?

Gratian's only direct contribution to the development of the text of the
Decretum was as the writer of the 3,592 words of the first-recension
case statements. (This is the author labelled Gratian 0 in my
stylometric analysis, whom I take to be the person we know as Gratian.)

Gratian's extended contribution to the development of the text of the
Decretum was as the leader of the study group, the thinker whose
solutions to problems presented by the canons are reflected in the
first-recension dicta. Although the words are demonstrably not his, the
fact that his name came to be attached to the text strongly suggests
that the arguments are his, and that is the basis for the authority
claim made on Gratian's behalf by the community the exponential growth
of the original study group ultimately created.

As long as the first recension was under active development by the study
group, which by the mid-1130s had evolved into something looking more
like a proper university course, or even an informally connected cluster
of courses (proto-faculty), the as yet non-beneficed among the earlier
contributors having attracted students of their own by this stage. In
fact, I think we can safely (if circularly) define the first-recension
as that stage in the textual development of the Decretum in which
Gratian was personally involved. I think Anders was right that the
person called Gratian was not a contributor to the second recension.

Now, that's something of a non-answer, since it doesn't put a date to
the end of Gratian's active involvement in the evolution of the text. He
could have remained involved until he got a benefice (possibly the
bishopric of Chiusi, c.1143), something he seems to have waited rather
longer for than many of the other early contributors to the project. But
the textual evolution of the first recension seems to have been more or
less complete by the mid-1130s, and (if we believe Noonan and Grebner),
Gratian was still acting as a legal consultant into the early 1140s.
That leaves a gap of a half-decade or so (1136-1143?) when Gratian could
have been, but doesn't seem to actually have been involved with the
further evolution of the text. I speculate that after the mid-1130s,
deficiencies in Gratian's knowledge of Roman law (at least relative to
other younger member of the loose proto-faculty) limited his further
contributions in the same way that relative deficiencies in his Latin
skills limited his contributions as unmediated author at earlier stages
of the project.

> Why are the contributors who followed Gratian all anonymous?

The larger-than-expected number of contributors and the apparent absence
of overlap between contributors to the first- and second-recension dicta
suggests that the involvement of individual contributors was relatively
brief, perhaps a year or two. Stark suggests that the reason
Christianity experienced exponential growth in its earliest stages was
that adherence conferred significant real-world benefits. I would
suggest that a similar dynamic is at work here. Involvement in Gratian's
project would have to have conferred significant real-world benefits for
the contributors to justify the uncompensated labor they put in, and to
explain the exponential growth pattern. The contributors were not
interested in teaching as a career. They were looking for competitive
advantage in the race for ecclesiastical benefices. When preferment came
their way, their involvement in the project ended. But the fact that
they had been successful attracted others to take their place.

The rapid turnover of contributors meant that the study group went
through several "generations" of members between the mid-1120s and
mid-1130s. By the time of Paucapalea in the late 1140s, turnover of
membership in what's now a quite substantial community is much slower,
but there have been so many intervening "generations" that any
information about the history of the project that didn't make it into
the text of the Decretum was lost, including (for Paucapalea) even the
name of Gratian.

> What does that say about the teachers and teaching of canon law
> between the early 1120s and the 1150s?

In the 1120s and 1130s, the distinction between teacher and student was
a lot less clear than it became a few decades later. Gratian is the
leader of the study group, and the figure to whom the group defers,
because he's the one who's done by far, one suspects, the most reading
in the sources of canon law. But having read widely in the canons is not
the same thing as having fully worked out a jurisprudential system, and
there is a lot that Gratian doesn't know yet (like whether and how to
incorporate Roman law into the system). So in some sense, they're all
figuring it out together. We should not think of the Gratian of the
1120s and 1130s as the kind of guild-certified master, able to "explain
it all for you," that we would expect to meet from the 1150s or 1160s
on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Pennington has argued against Winroth's claim that the development from
the first to the second recension of the *Decretum* was accomplished in
a single bound by someone other than the original Gratian on the grounds
that someone would have noticed and remarked on such an extreme
reconfiguration of the text:

> My main argument for not accepting the theory that there were two
> Gratians is quite simple. It is difficult to imagine that if a Gratian
> compiled the pre-Vulgate *Decretum*, and another person doubled the
> size from ca. 2000 canons to ca. 4000, the first generation of jurists
> after Gratian would have not noticed or not known about the second
> Gratian's work and blithely attributed what was now a massive work to
> just "Gratian."[1].

They did not notice or know, however, because the *Decretum* came to the
attention of a significant audience only among the second, not the
first, generation of jurists after Gratian. The earliest significant
change to the text to draw widespread notice was the division of the
first part of the *Decretum* into distinctions by Paucapalea.
Paucapalea, though, was far enough removed from the circumstances
surrounding the composition of the text that he did not even know the
name of its author. Ironically, Pennington's "someone would have
noticed" argument is wrong precisely because his argument that the text
of the *Decretum* underwent a long and slow process of development is
right.

This, in turn, is an argument in favor of the case statements having
been one of the first parts of the *Decretum* reduced to a stable
written form. The logical alternative, that case statements were written
after the fact, would have to have taken place late enough in the
development of the text that someone would have noticed.

[1] Kenneth Pennington, “The Biography of Gratian, the Father of Canon
Law,” in *A Service Beyond All Recompense*, ed. Kurt Martens (Catholic
University of America Press, 2018), 361–62.

<div align="center">
<a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/"><img alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0" src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-nd/4.0/88x31.png" /></a><br />This work is licensed under a <a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/">Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License</a>.
</div>
