-   Ulpian
-   August 1, August 3, and September 17 emails
-   Patrick Juola, "The Rowling Case: A Proposed Standard Analytic
    Protocol for Authorship Questions", *Digital Scholarship in the
    Humanities*, Vol. 30, Supplement 1, 2015.

### Successes and Failures

Historians and literary scholars have long (if imprecise) memories about
poorly-conceived attempts at authorship attribution (e.g., Tony Honoré's
attempt to attribute Roman law texts to Ulpian, and R.A. Cooper and D.A.
Pearsall's attempt to attribute authorship of the Gawain Poems).
Conversely, successful, methodologically rigorous, attributions of
authorship are quickly forgotten when the author or the text in question
is uninteresting to literary academia (e.g., Patrick Juola's successful
attribution of *The Cuckoo's Calling*, a 2013 crime fiction novel, to
J.K. Rowling of Harry Potter fame.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Bruce W. Frier of the University of Michigan Law School negatively
reviewed Tony Honoré's *Ulpian*(1982) for its misuse of stylometric
analysis for authorship attribution. Honoré generated lists of what
would now be called Most Distinctive Words (MDWs) and Statistically
Improbable Phrases (SIPs) from a concordance of the works of Ulpian, and
used them to attempt to periodize and to determine authorship of texts
attributed to Ulpian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The A.S.G. Edwards essay in the July 3, 2020 issue of *The Times
Literary Supplement (TLS)*[1] appears to refer to "The Gawain Poems" by
R.A. Cooper and D.A. Pearsall.[2]

Cooper and Pearsall conclude that the stylometric evidence they evaluate
is consistent with common authorship for the four poems preserved in
British Library MS Cotton Nero A.x (*Sir Gawain and the Green Knight*,
*Pearl*, *Patience*, and *Cleanness*). Some of the stylometric measures
they employ are only relevant to poetry, focusing specifically on the
alliterative features of the texts. Cooper and Pearsall also analyze the
frequencies of 11 function words, distinguishing between words occurring
at the beginning of a line and words occurring in the middle of a line.
(John Burrows and David Hoover in a series of papers starting in 2000
established 30 words as a best-practice minimum for this kind of word
frequency analysis.) It is not, for the most part, very methodologically
sophisticated work, even by the standards of 1988. The one exception is
their analysis of the co-occurrence of parts of speech (POSs) within
lines, which anticipates the kind of part of speech bigram and trigram
analysis that is sometimes performed today when appropriately tagged
electronic texts are available. (An example of part of speech bigram
analysis would be to analyze the frequencies of occurrence of
noun-adjective pairs versus adjective-noun pairs in Latin texts.)

Google Scholar indicates that the Cooper and Pearsall article has 12
citations as of August 2020, so it does not appear to have had much
influence on the subsequent development of scholarship within its
subfield. (To put that number in context, Google Scholar indicates that
Pennington's "Bartolome de las Casas and the Tradition of Medieval Law"
has 86 citations.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This email is resumptive of our conversation of August 3 about recent
attempts to apply stylometric methods to attribute medieval texts. Ken
suggested citing attributions that have achieved some threshold of
scholarly acceptance. Here's another one that I got from a conversation
this week with Mike Kestemont, the University of Antwerp researcher
whose work is a model for what I'm doing.

The text is a set of Latin love letters between an anonymous man and
woman (Vir and Mulier or just V. and M.), extant in a single manuscript
that was copied c.1470 under the title Ex epistolis duorum amantium.
Constant Mews in The Lost Love Letters of Heloise and Abelard (2001)
attributed the letters to Abelard and Heloise. Jan Ziolkowski of
Dumbarton Oaks contested Mews's attribution, partly on stylometric
grounds, in:

Ziolkowski, Jan M. "Lost and Not Yet Found: Heloise, Abelard, and the
"Epistolae Duorum Amantium"." The Journal of Medieval Latin 14 (2004):
171-202. (http://www.jstor.org/stable/45019598).

The stylometric component of Ziolkowski's argument consists of a
comparison of the relative frequencies of the function words autem,
igitur, ergo, ita(que), quia, and quippe as they appear in Historia
Calamitatum, Letters 3 and 5, and the letters attributed to Vir in the
EDA collection. Ziolkowski's rebuttal to Mews's attribution is perhaps
more relevant to my work than some of the other attributions we've
discussed, in that it is a negative attribution. Like my claim that the
case statements in the Decretum were not written by author(s) of the
dicta, Ziolkowski is arguing that the texts were not written by the
putative author. Furthermore, Ziolkowski's negative attribution was made
on the basis of function words drawn from discontinuous and relatively
small samples of medieval Latin.

In keeping with the previous emails in this series, I'll note that
Google Scholar shows that Ziolkowski's article has been cited 23 times,
considerably less than Ken's "Bartolomeo de las Casas and the Tradition
of Medieval Law", but better than the Cooper and Pearsall paper on
Gawain that started this conversation.

# Bibliography

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div id="ref-cooper_gawain_1988" class="csl-entry">

Cooper, R. A., and D. A. Pearsall. “The Gawain Poems: A Statistical
Approach to the Question of Common Authorship.” *The Review of English
Studies* 39, no. 155 (1988): 365–85.

</div>

<div id="ref-edwards_go_2020" class="csl-entry">

Edwards, A. S. G. “Go Little Books: More Problems of Early Modern
Attribution.” *TLS. Times Literary Supplement*, no. 6118 (2020): 9.

</div>

</div>

[1] A. S. G. Edwards, “Go Little Books: More Problems of Early Modern
Attribution,” *TLS. Times Literary Supplement*, no. 6118 (2020): 9.

[2] R. A. Cooper and D. A. Pearsall, “The Gawain Poems: A Statistical
Approach to the Question of Common Authorship,” *The Review of English
Studies* 39, no. 155 (1988): 365–85.

<div align="center">
<a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/"><img alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0" src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-nd/4.0/88x31.png" /></a><br />This work is licensed under a <a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/">Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License</a>.
</div>
