**Manifest**

1.  Dissertation Proposal with Chodorow comments

2.  Rem Non Novam conference paper (final 29 March 2016 version)

3.  ICMCL conference paper (final 7 August 2016 version)

4.  1 November 2017 HIGR 295 draft with Chodorow comments

5.  Current working draft

**2017-12-08 Notes**

The section previously headed **Introduction** (*incipit*: \"Around
1140, a revolutionary textbook transformed the study of canon law into a
systematic academic discipline\") really isn\'t an introduction, so I
re-headed it **Background**.

Lack of a real introduction misled Stan into thinking there isn\'t a
clear finding (the author of the case statements is not the author of
the first-recension *dicta*). I\'ve been following Anders Winroth\'s
boil-the-frog-slowly rhetorical strategy. Anders intentionally buries
the lede, waiting until late in *The Making of Gratian\'s Decretum* to
come out with his assertion that Gratian 1 is not the same as Gratian 2.
This maybe something (like my two-audiences theory inspired by the
prolog of Stephen of Tournai) that just has to be jettisoned.

**textbooks =\> faculties =\> universities**. I thought I did enough to
emphasize the development of faculties of, e.g., Roman law, canon law,
and theology as an intermediate step between study loosely organized
around a master and the fully-corporatized university. Apparently not.

**When the the *Decretum* [stop]{.underline} being important?**

The *Decretum* stopped being the focus of research (as opposed to
teaching) around 1190, when attention shifted to papal decretals. Paul:
the Decretum stopped being the source of new research problems (cf.
Kuhn, *Structure of Scientific Revolutions,* geometric optics \"ceased
to yield research problems\"). Stan: the *Decretum* was the basis for
the \"first course\" in canon law. After around 1190 papal decretals
became the basis for a \"second course\". The \"first course\" came to
be seen as important only as a prerequisite for the \"second course\"
which is where all the intellectual and professional action were. Note
that this is the end of Gratian\'s understanding of canon law as a form
of practical theology (still present in Stephen of Tournai\'s prolog),
and the rise of something that looks a lot more like law straight up.
\"We are very far from the School of Laon, are we not?\"

**Why Bologna (as opposed to Pavia or Rome)? **Stan: as much because of
what Bologna was not (i.e., under direct imperial or papal control) as
because of what it was. Although we tend to think of Bologna in the
Middle Ages as being a part of the papal state, it was not under direct
papal control until the 14th century. Emperors were able to exert direct
influence only during their infrequent expeditions to Italy.
The *Authentica Habita* was issued in the context of one such
expedition. See [Gianluca Raccagni, *The Lombard League:
1167-1225*]{.underline} (CUA DG657.4 .R33 2010).

See also [The New Cambridge medieval history]{.underline} (UCSD D117
.N48 1995 v.4 pt.2) Volume IV c. 1024-1198 Part II, Chapter 15 Italy in
the twelfth century (a) Northern and central Italy in the twelfth
century, Giovanni Tabacco, pp.422-441. (USD does not have Volume IV). 

See also Peter Partner, *The lands of St. Peter : the Papal State in the
Middle Ages and the early Renaissance *(UCSD DG797 .P37 1972b).

R. W. Southern discusses the issue in *Scholastic Humanism and the
Unification of Europe* (Oxford, UK ; Cambridge, Mass., USA: Blackwell,
1995). Volume I Foundations. Chapter 9 The Integration of Doctrine and
Law: Gratian. IX Time and Place Reviewed, especially pp.313 ff.

**Nobody in the 12th century was practicing undiluted Roman law**

\"But students of Roman law \... knew very well that, in their daily
work, Roman law would be no more than a tool providing procedures and
principles which were applicable in ecclesiastical courts all over
western Europe.\" pp.316-317.

(Example of Pisa in Beinecke 415 operating a legal
system *influenced* by Roman law. See Chris Wickham, *Courts and
Conflict in Twelfth-Century Tuscany*.) (UCSD KKH 7858 .W53 2003)

**Revolution:**

**Authorship:**

Theory of authorship: Minnis, Barthes (Death of the Author), Foucault
(What is an Author?)

We\'re not going to make an attribution of authorship based on the
frequencies of two words. Adding more words adds accuracy?
certainty? **up to a point. **Why up to a point? Because word
frequencies are observed to follow an empirical pattern known as Zipf\'s
law, that the second-most frequent word occurs half as frequently as the
most frequent word. (Frequencies fall off exponentially: 3rd-most
frequent is a quarter of 1st, 4th-most is an eighth of the 1st, usw.)
Wrong 1/N, where N is the rank!

**Note on translations:**

**Gratian**

> ***The third order of business then is to recount the history of
> efforts, from the* Summa Parisiensis *on, of legal scholars and
> historians to find the man behind the name Gratian. Here, you need to
> lay out the traditional evidence used for solving this puzzle. You are
> lucky that Noonan, Pennington etc. have laid out the evidence and
> played with it for you.*\
> -- Stan Chodorow**

**The starting point for all modern scholarship on Gratian himself is
John T. Noonan Jr.'s classic 1979 *Traditio* article "Gratian slept
here: The changing identity of the father of the systematic study of
canon law". Noonan's approach is apophatic, demonstrating that there is
no sound historical basis for most of the affirmative statements, for
example that Gratian was a Camaldolese monk at SS. Felix and Nabor in
Bologna, that many mid-twentieth century handbooks and reference works
presented as commonplace. **

**Very little is known about the historical Gratian, and almost
everything that previous generations thought was known about Gratian has
proved, on closer examination, to be myth.**[^1] **On the evidence found
in the *Decretum*, Gratian seems to have been less interested in
contemporary ecclesiastical or secular politics in general, and in the
Investiture Controversy in particular, than some modern scholars think
he should have been. Gratian similarly seems, based on the relatively
limited use he makes in the *Decretum* of material from the *Codex* and
*Digest* of Justinian, to have been either less interested in, or less
aware of, the revival of the study of Roman law in the early twelfth
century than we think he should have been. On the other hand, he seems
to have been more aware of, and more interested in, the emergence of
scholastic theology in northern France than we can easily explain. \[see
Kuttner on Gratian and Abelard, apparently "The Father of the Science of
Canon Law" (1942).**

Luscombe, D. E. "Abelard and the Decretum of Gratian." Chapter. In *The
School of Peter Abelard: The Influence of Abelard\'s Thought in the
Early Scholastic Period*, 214--23. Cambridge Studies in Medieval Life
and Thought: New Series. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511896781.010.

**Gratian**

Kuttner \<=\> Noonan \<=\> Simon of Bisignano

How to reconcile a contradiction? The early manuscript tradition for the
*Decretum*, even within (among?) the first recension manuscripts (Aa,
Bc, Fd, P) shows enough variation to suggest that the text developed
continuously over the span of, and in parallel with, a relatively long
teaching career -- (perhaps/certainly/almost surely) a decade or more.
On the other hand, Gratian's deep personal obscurity and the fact that
Gratian as a personality is completely absent from the kinds of academic
genealogies of teaching masters of the kind that Odofredus (d. 1265)
retails (with which Odofredus regales his students) for the Roman law
tradition ...

Gratian was the putative author of the foundational textbook for canon
law in the classical period, one of the three or four most important
(premier) intellectual enterprises of the high Middle Ages (twelfth
century renaissance) and yet he is a non-presence in academic
genealogies or origin stories for the field. This suggests a short, or
even no, teaching career (Winroth, Southern). The controversy between
Pennington and Winroth has largely been an argument over when to fix
(assign?) the moment in time and in the textual development of the
Decretum when development passes out of the hands of Gratian and into
the hands of his successors (whether it be Gratian 2 as Winroth has
argued, or Paucapalea, or an anonymous glossator as Pennington has
argued.) Winroth places the hand-off between the first and second
recensions (from Gratian 1 to Gratian 2). Pennington not unreasonably
points out that it is hard to imagine that contemporaries would not have
noticed and commented on such a hand-off. Pennington places the hand-off
after, if not the completion (implies intent), at least the
finalization, even abandonment of the project by Gratian (at the end of
his teaching career, whether through death, disability, or
ecclesiastical promotion). **But what if the hand-off is before the
first recension, but after the composition of the case statements?**

**Note**: Odofredo is also the source for associating Gratian with SS.
Felix and Nabor. (Noonan, "Gratian slept here", p. 148)

**Note**: That Gratian was "seen" at San Marco Venice in 1143, somewhat
undermines my argument for an early (probably early- to mid-1130s)
hand-off between the composition of the hypothetical case statements
(*themata*) introducing the 36 *causae* and the composition of the
first-recension (pre-Vulgate *dicta*. This implies that Gratian was
still professionally active, but not yet a bishop.

The tradition of Roman law teaching in Bologna preserved elaborate
genealogies of masters and their students (Pepo taught Irnerius, who
taught the Four Doctor, etc.) Odofredus is the source for this
tradition, which is found in his commentary on *Dig.* 1.1.6. See
Pennington "Big Bang". (LOC Authority Denari, Odofredo, d. 1265) CUA has
*Lectura Supra Digesto Novo* in Canon Law Folios Non-circ KC 55 .O25 L5
1968, *Dig*. 1.1.6 is in the *Digestum vetus*, so this is probably the
wrong place to look. Brandon Parlopiano's electronic library does not
include Odofredo's lectures on the *Digest*.

No one claims to have been Gratian\'s student: \[R.W. Southern,
*Scholastic Humanism and the Unification of Europe*: \"none of the
earliest users of his work claim to have been taught by him\". (p. 287);
\"although other scholars made some very early alterations and additions
to the text of the *Decretum*, none of them claimed to have been taught
by him." (p. 304)\]

There are three plausible candidates: Paucapalea (fl. 1140s), Simon of
Bisignano (fl. 1174--1179), Omnebene (d. 1185). What is the basis for
the claim that Simon of Bisignano was a student of Gratian? Pennington
in the Bio-Bibliographical Guide flatly states that Paucapalea was
"\[a\] pupil of Gratian and the author of the first commentary on
the Decretum". But Paucapalea does not refer to Gratian by name in the
preface to his *Summa*: \"Magistri autem hoc opus condentis ipsa decreta
sunt materia.\" (p.3, Schulte) \"The decrees themselves, however, are
the subject matter of the master producing this work.\" (p.184,
Somerville and Brasington). Indeed, he appears not to refer to Gratian
by name anywhere in the Summa (assuming the OCR text layer of the PDF is
accurate). Plus, Paucapalea thinks that Gratian wrote *de* *Cons*.,
which, if Rambaud is correct, indicates that he (Paucapalea) was
personally unfamiliar with the author and his plan of work.

Pennington does not indicate that either Simon of Bisignano or Omnebene
were students of Gratian. The evidence that Simon of Bisignano was a
student of Gratian's comes from references within his writing (cite
Kuttner "Research on Gratian: Acta and Agenda" p. 7, and Aimone p. 412
\[=p. 417 in PDF\] and p. 542 \[=p. 546 in PDF\]. Noonan rejects this
(p. 157), but Kuttner disagrees.)

**\
**

Paucapalea did not necessarily know Gratian\'s name, but referred to him
as \"Master\":

\"Magistri autem hoc opus condentis ipsa decreta sunt materia.\" (p.3)

\"The decrees themselves, however, are the subject matter of the master
producing this work.\" (p.184)

Paucapalea understood Gratian\'s method to be harmony from apparent
dissonance:

\"Intentio vero eius fuit, ipsa decreta ordinare et in super­ficie
dissonantia ad concordiam revocare.\" (p.3)

\"His intention was to set the decrees in order and on the surface to
reduce those which are dissonant to harmony.\" (p.184)

\"Demum transit ad causas, quas varias et multiplices ponit; in quibus,
formatis quaestionibus, hinc inde in affirmatione et negatione
auctoritates allegat, quas velut prima fronte oppositas sem­per ad
concordiam revocare intendit.\" (p.3)

Paucapalea was aware of de Cons.:

\"In extremis de ecclesiarum dedicatione et corpore et sanguine domini
atque baptismo nec non et confirmatione pleniter tractat, et in his suum
tractatum terminat.\" (p.3)

Genesis 3:12

Paucapalea: \"The procedure of pleading \[placitandi forma\] seems to
have been found initially in paradise, when the first man, questioned by
the Lord about the sin of disobedience, used a counteraccusation and a
shift of responsibility for the sin, and alleges that the guilt was
placed on \[his\] wife saying, \'The woman, whom you gave, gave to me
and I ate.\'\" (p. 181)

Stephen of Tournai: \"Certain men say that divine law had its origin
with the beginning of the world. For when Adam was charged by the Lord
with disobedience, hurling a countercharge against \[his\] wife, just as
defense in a suit, he turned rather into a prosecutor of \[his\] wife
saying, \'The woman whom you gave to me as a companion deceived me, and
I ate.\' And thus the process of litigating \[litigandi forma\], or as
we commonly say of pleading, seems to have arisen in paradise.\" (p.
195)

Macro (large-grain) structure

Rufinus: "\... he divides his book into three parts, the first of which
he devotes to ecclesiastical ministries, the second to
\[ecclesiastical\] business, and the third to ecclesiastical
sacraments."

(Rufinus in Somerville and Brasington, Prefaces to Canon Law Books in
Latin Christendom, pp. 192-193.)

Stephen of Tournai: "The first of these parts is devoted to
ecclesiastical ministries, the second to ecclesiastical problems, the
third to ecclesiastical sacraments." (Stephen of Tournai in Somerville
and Brasington, Prefaces to Canon Law Books in Latin Christendom, p.
201.)

[^1]: **John T. Noonan, Jr. "Gratian slept here: The changing identity
    of the father of the systematic study of canon law", *Traditio*,
    1979**
