Around 1140, a revolutionary textbook transformed the study of canon law
into a systematic academic discipline. It did not have an attribution of
authorship. It did not even have a title. However, as it entered
widespread circulation in the middle decades of the twelfth century, the
new textbook gave rise to a considerable body of commentary, and some
early glosses referred to it as the *Concordia discordantium canonum*
("Concordance of discordant canons"). The same glosses identified
Gratian, an otherwise unknown teacher thought to have worked in Bologna,
as its author.[1] As a result, the book came to be commonly known as the
*Decretum Gratiani* ("Gratian's *Decretum*").

The *Decretum* is *not* the kind of document, like the Fournier
Register---the record of an episcopal inquisition into Albigensian
heretics surviving in a single manuscript---that many non-specialists,
with a journalistic eye for the exotic and the extreme, take to be the
central concern of medieval studies.[2] The *Decretum* was, instead,
both a normal and a normative text in its own time, and for centuries
thereafter. The *Decretum* survives in an unusually large number of
manuscripts---around 150-200 from the twelfth century and around 600 for
the medieval period as a whole.[3] The *Decretum* was the fundamental
textbook for first-year university instruction in canon law through the
seventeenth century. As the first volume of the *Corpus iuris canonici*,
the *Decretum* remained valid law in the Roman Catholic Church until
1917 and exercised enormous influence over the 1917 and 1983
codifications of canon law that replaced the medieval *Corpus*.

### School, Faculty, University

Both the content and the form of the *Decretum* had an enormous impact
on the civilization of medieval Europe. Gratian's methodological
breakthrough transformed the study of canon law into a rigorous academic
discipline. His imposition of a consistent interpretive framework
(hermeneutic) on the inherited and internally contradictory mass of
canonical texts transformed them into a coherent system of substantive
law. A generation before Gratian, Ivo of Chartres (†1115) had proposed
the possibility of such a program in the preface to his own canonical
collections, but he left its application to his readers. Gratian
demonstrated that Ivo's program could in fact be carried out in a truly
systematic way and did so at an historical moment when the need for such
a sweeping synthesis was particularly compelling. Gratian was working in
the immediate aftermath of the Concordat of Worms (1122), which
recognized the formal juridical independence of the Church from secular
authority. Gratian's *Decretum* provided a comprehensive blueprint for
the legal machinery by which the Church ultimately came to govern the
many aspects of life in Christian society over which it claimed
exclusive jurisdiction.

The form in which Gratian's intellectual achievement was transmitted had
as great an impact as its content. The *Decretum* was arguably the first
book in the European tradition written from the ground up as a textbook.
Gratian's own teaching was probably typical of the relatively informal
and unstructured environment of the medieval schools, organized around
the activity of a gifted master, learned and charismatic enough to
gather a critical mass of students. The existence of a textbook,
however, made it possible for someone other than the original master to
teach the same, or a similar, course. A textbook that circulates widely
enough becomes a *de facto* standard, and classes taught from it, by
whomever, become likewise standardized. The *Decretum*, and classes
taught from it or its abbreviations, attained the status of *de facto*
standards across much of Europe very quickly---within the two decades
between 1140 and 1160. I believe that the new evidence previewed above
suggests that while we owe the intellectual substance of at least the
first recension of the *Decretum* to Gratian, we owe the words in which
that substance was expressed to his students.[4]

The compilation and circulation of the *Decretum* led directly to the
formation of faculties of canon law across Europe. Faculties came into
being as an institutional response to a new problem raised by
standardized classes taught from standardized textbooks: what are the
requisite qualifications for the teaching of canon law? In some
respects, early faculties were similar to other medieval guilds that
regulated competition between masters in places where material and
political conditions favored the concentration of many masters
practicing the same craft in one place.[5] Faculties and craft guilds,
however, differed in one important respect: while the most important
product of the masters of the guild of shoemakers was shoes, the most
important product of the masters of the faculty of canon law was, at
least in the first generation, the next generation of masters of the
faculty of canon law. The distinctive innovation of the faculty was the
conferring of credentials or qualifications (to call them degrees is
perhaps anachronistic) on students who completed a prescribed sequence
of standardized courses, defined in such a way that the requirements for
completion for students coincided with those for admission to teaching.
The faculty was a crucial intermediate stage in the institutional
evolution from school to university, one that has been obscured by the
retrospective myth-making of famous universities, which, once
established, sought to enhance the lustre of their names by projecting
their origins as far as possible into the past.[6] It is perhaps going
too far to claim that the *Decretum* was the textbook that created the
university. It is not, however, going too far to recognize that its
existence was a necessary precondition for the emergence of the faculty
of canon law.

In creating his new textbook, Gratian blazed a trail for canon law that
theology followed about two decades later. The appearance around 1160 of
Peter Lombard's *Sentences* served as the catalyst for a similar
transformation of theology into a rigorous academic discipline taught
from a standardized textbook in the context of a formally organized
curriculum by a degree-granting faculty, and for the displacement of
more loosely organized regional schools, such as the one at Laon, by the
preeminent theology faculty of Paris.

In the first decades of the thirteenth century, both the faculties of
canon law and the *Decretum* settled into their permanent places in the
organization of medieval academic life, as the faculties of canon law
became part of the university (a corporation encompassing several
faculties such as those of arts, law, and theology), while the focus of
legal scholarship in canon law gradually shifted from the "old law" of
Gratian to the "new law" of papal decretals.[7]

Recent complaints about the corporatization of the university
notwithstanding, *universitas* means corporation.[8] We think of a
corporation as a commercial entity, but medieval legal thinkers looked
upon the corporation at a more basic level, as a means for legally
creating an artificial, collective person, and then investing that
"person" with rights and privileges that could otherwise only be held by
a natural person or persons, such as the right to own property and the
standing of a litigant in courts of law. The most fundamental right of a
corporation, however, was the right of self-governance, including the
right of the corporation to select its own leadership. The classic
medieval example of corporate self-governance was the right of a
cathedral chapter to elect a bishop. For an academic faculty, the
exercise of the right of corporate self-governance took the particular
form of determining the qualifications for teaching, something often
contested by the local bishop.[9] The incorporation of several faculties
as a university provided a form of organization well-adapted for
achieving both permanence and independence from local ecclesiastical
authority through the accumulation of legal rights and privileges. The
faculties ensured their own long-term survival by incorporating within
the larger university.

The *Decretum* remained the standard textbook for the prerequisite first
course in canon law throughout the Middle Ages. Around 1190, however,
while the evolution from faculty to university was still in progress,
the focus of academic canonists shifted away from Gratian and toward the
new jurisprudence of papal decretals. Scholarly attention devoted to the
*Decretum* after 1190 tended to focus on improving its utility as a
teaching text. Between 1214 and 1217, [Johannes
Teutonicus](http://amesfoundation.law.harvard.edu/BioBibCanonists/Report_Biobib2.php?record_id=a303)
(c.1170-1245) compiled more than a half-century's worth of accumulated
commentary on Gratian into the *Glossa Ordinaria*,[10] and [Bartholomeus
Brixiensis](http://amesfoundation.law.harvard.edu/BioBibCanonists/Report_Biobib2.php?record_id=a050)
(fl.1234-1258) revised the ordinary gloss between 1234 and 1241.[11] By
then, the interest of thirteenth-century teachers and students centered
on a new advanced second course in canon law taught from Raymond de
Peñafort's *Decretales Gregorii IX* (1234), edited from five earlier
compilations of papal decretals that had become a teaching library of
decretal law. The *Decretum* retained its status as a classic textbook
but never again held the intellectual attention of the discipline in the
way it had during the second half of the twelfth century.

The emergence of faculties of canon law in the second half of the
twelfth century was a feature of a wider intellectual and social
revolution. There had been a revival in Bologna of the formal study of
Roman law during the second and third decades of the twelfth century.
The immediate impetus for the revival was the recovery of the great
*libri legales* from which law had been taught in the late Roman world,
most important, the *Digest* of Justinian, because it provided the
pattern for jurisprudence as a systematic intellectual activity.[12] The
early Romanists therefore did not need to create textbooks for their
students as Gratian had to for his.

The twelfth-century revolution in legal science did not take place in a
vacuum. It took place because of the emergence, especially in Italy, of
an increasingly urban and commercial society with many moving parts.
Such a society needed a correspondingly complex and sophisticated legal
system, and, because it had much in common, both culturally and
materially, with the society of the late Roman world, it was able to
borrow extensively from Roman law.

The emergence of distinct faculties of arts, law, and theology in the
middle decades of the twelfth century gave rise to a rapidly
proliferating number of major universities throughout Europe,
recognizably continuous in form with those of the present day. The
existence of standardized textbooks such as Gratian's *Decretum* and
later Peter Lombard's *Sentences* was an absolutely essential
precondition for the formation of academic faculties organized along
formal disciplinary lines, offering standardized courses of instruction
for their students. Those faculties in turn supplied the foundation for
the medieval, and, by extension, the modern European university.
Gratian's *Decretum* can be seen from the point of view of this series
of historical developments as the textbook that set the stage for the
emergence of the university.

## Roman Law

There is good evidence that canon law emerged as a distinct, formally
organized, academic discipline about two decades after Roman law and
about two decades before theology. Therefore, any information that
allows us to refine our knowledge of the dates by which those
disciplines, but especially Roman law, emerged has considerable
evidentiary value for the dating of the emergence of canon law as well.
The current consensus among historians is that the teaching of Roman law
got under way as an organized activity in Bologna between 1100 and 1110
and that the teaching of canon law got under way, also at Bologna, a
little later, perhaps between 1120 and 1130.

It is first necessary to distinguish the body of Roman law formally
codified in the sixth century under the emperor Justinian (†565) from
the forms of Roman law that had survived through continuous use and
adaptation in southern Europe from late antiquity into the eleventh
century. Early medieval Europe had not forgotten Roman law, and, in
particular, the *Lex Romana Visigothorum* or *Breviary of Alaric* (506),
derived from the Theodosian Code (438), was a major source of Roman law
concepts and terminology throughout the early middle ages. The
codification produced by Justinian's commissioners under the guidance of
Tribonian (†545?) received limited reception in the sixth century in
those parts of Italy then under Byzantine control. However, it
disappeared from view around the beginning of the seventh century. The
last known reference to the *Digest* in the Latin-speaking and -writing
West is found in a letter of pope Gregory I in 603.[13]

What was new in Italy from the late eleventh century on was the revival
of the study and application of Roman law as codified in the *Corpus
iuris civilis* of Justinian: the *Institutes*, the *Codex*, the *Digest*
or *Pandects*, and the *Novels*. (The *Novels*, unlike the other volumes
of Justinian's *corpus*, were originally written in Greek, and were
known in this period in the form of a Latin translation, the
*Authenticum*.) The first documentary evidence for this revival is a
reference to the *Digest* found in the *Marturi placitum*, the record of
a court case held in 1076 in present-day Poggibonsi in Tuscany.[14]

Because of the title *Corpus iuris civilis*, "the body of civil law,"
Roman law was also referred to as civil law, and students, teachers, and
practitioners of Roman law were referred to as civilians. Gratian,
following Isidore of Seville (†636), used a much older definition: "*Ius
civile est, quod quisque populus vel civitas sibi proprium divina
humanaque causa constituit* (Civil law is what each people and each
commonwealth establishes as its own law for divine or human
reasons)."[15] Gratian, again following Isidore, referred to Roman law
as the law of the Quirites (*Ius Quiritum*).[16]

The scholarly consensus that the teaching of Roman and canon law were
going concerns in Bologna by around 1110 and 1130 respectively has had
two notable recent dissenters, Charles Radding and Anders Winroth.
Radding has proposed that the epicenter of the revival of the study of
Roman law was not Bologna, but Pavia, and places the date somewhat
earlier, in the late eleventh century. Radding's claim is that research
into Roman law developed from its having been used as an analytical tool
for the explication of the central text of the Lombard legal tradition,
the *Liber Legis Langobardorum* or *Liber Papiensis*. Radding's argument
has not met with widespread acceptance.[17]

Anders Winroth is by far the more consequential dissenter from the
consensus. He draws attention to the underdeveloped way in which Gratian
uses Justinianic Roman law in what Winroth calls the first recension,
the earliest version of the *Decretum* to survive in more than one
manuscript.

There are only three places in the first recension of the *Decretum*
that incorporate material taken directly from Justinianic Roman law
sources: C.2 q.6 c.28 (an excerpt from the *Authenticum*), and C.15 q.3
cc.1-3 and C.15 q.3 c.4 (three excerpts from the *Codex* and four from
the *Digest*).[18]

Gratian does not deploy the proper Justinianic shades of meaning to the
concepts of ownership and possession when discussing the issue of
*restitutio in integrum* in the first-recension version of C.3 q.1
d.p.c.2. Instead, he uses concepts and vocabulary that, Winroth argues,
derive from pre-Justinianic Roman law sources such as the *Lex Romana
Visigothorum*.[19]

Furthermore, there are places in the first recension where Gratian, in
Winroth's opinion, would have reached different conclusions had he used
Justinianic Roman law. He points to Gratian's treatment of false (or at
least unsuccessful) accusers in C.2 q.3, and the penalties, including
infamy, incurred by them. Gratian's analysis ---he distinguishes three
categories of false accusers based on material indirectly derived from
the *Lex Romana Visigothorum*--- is incompatible with the well-developed
Justinianic jurisprudence on the subject.[20]

But there is one question---C.15 q.3---in the first recension of the
*Decretum* in which Gratian makes substantive use of Justinianic Roman
law concepts and vocabulary as a part of his argument in the *dicta* and
does so more or less correctly in Winroth's judgment. This is
significant from Winroth's point of view, because it demonstrates that
Gratian did not have an ideological objection to the use of Roman law,
as Vetulani and Chodorow argued.[21] Rather, Winroth argues that where
Gratian either failed to use Roman law, or used it incorrectly, it was
because he lacked the knowledge of that tradition.[22]

For reasons that I will discuss more fully below, Winroth is convinced
that the first recension of the *Decretum* cannot have been completed or
entered circulation earlier than around 1140. The underdeveloped way in
which Justinianic Roman law is used in the first recension therefore
leads Winroth to argue that the study and teaching of Roman law in
Bologna had not progressed nearly as far by 1140 as the consensus holds.

Some corollaries to Winroth's argument that Roman law teaching got off
to a late start are fairly far out of the mainstream. A notable example
is his dating of the famous letter of an anonymous monk to abbot B
(probably Bernard III Garin) of Saint-Victor, Marseille ---the content
of which Winroth has so memorably summarized as "\[m\]y donkey is dead,
so I am going to law school"---to the 1180s rather than the 1120s. But
it is extremely difficult to imagine that a letter that shows no
apparent awareness that either civil (Roman) or canon law were being
taught in Bologna can have been written in the 1180s.[23]

Kenneth Pennington has pointed to the *Authentica Habita* (1155/1158)
issued by the emperor Frederick I (†1190), which has traditionally been
taken as extending imperial protection to the law school of Bologna, its
faculty, and its students.[24] Pennington makes the common-sense point
that a privilege like this is unlikely to have been granted to an
institution just getting off the ground.[25] Winroth counter-argues that
the privilege mentions neither Bologna nor those involved in legal
studies specifically.[26]

I agree with the consensus that the teaching of Roman and canon law were
going concerns in Bologna by around 1110 and 1130 respectively, but the
reader should keep in mind that Winroth, a scholar whose point of view
is not to be lightly dismissed, thinks otherwise.

In recent years, it has become obligatory to mention at this point in
any discussion of the revolution in legal science the case of one
Mengho, a resident of Bologna who was hanged in December 1299 after
having been tortured into confessing to the theft of some bolts of
fabric. There was not in 1299, nor is there now, much doubt as to
Mengho's guilt---a search of his residence was carried out during the
course of the investigation into the crime and he was found to be in
possession of the stolen goods, a state of affairs that he was unable to
credibly explain. Neither can it be seriously doubted that Mengho's case
was conducted according to the due process standards prevailing in that
time and place. Full proof necessary to convict a criminal defendant
(*reus*) under Roman law required either a confession or the testimony
of two witnesses, testimony unlikely to be forthcoming in the case of a
crime of stealth, such as Mengho's, committed at night. In the absence
of a voluntary confession or the testimony of witnesses, torture of the
defendant in order to obtain an involuntary confession was simply the
next routine step of due process. Indeed, Hermann Kantorowicz (†1940)
brought the story of Mengho to the attention of medieval legal
historians, and it remains well known today, precisely because
Kantorowicz considered it a textbook example of inquisitorial (as
opposed to adversarial) procedure under the *ordo iudiciarius* derived
from Roman law.[27]

The fact that Mengho was tortured and executed was not the point of the
story for Kantorowicz, but it is for us. In the twenty-first century,
the story of Mengho is brought up to make a particular point. There is a
powerful scholarly tradition going back at least to Charles Homer
Haskins of presenting the revolution in legal science as an intellectual
triumph that took place in the classroom.[28] All revolutions, including
the revolution in legal science, have winners and losers, and some of
the losers we do not feel very sorry for.[29] But what happened in the
classroom ultimately had consequences in the courtroom, consequences
that were enacted on the rights and property, on the bodies and lives,
of women and men in the real world.

# Bibliography

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div id="ref-appelt_urkunden_1979" class="csl-entry">

Appelt, Heinrich, ed. *Die Urkunden der deutschen Könige und Kaiser*.
Vol. X,2. Monumenta Germaniae historica. Diplomata regum et imperatorum
Germaniae. Berlin: Weidmannsche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1979.

</div>

<div id="ref-bellomo_common_1995" class="csl-entry">

Bellomo, Manlio. *The Common Legal Past of Europe: 1000-1800*. Studies
in Medieval and Early Modern Canon Law, v. 4. Washington, D.C: Catholic
University of America Press, 1995.

</div>

<div id="ref-brasington_order_2016" class="csl-entry">

Brasington, Bruce Clark, ed. *Order in the Court: Medieval Procedural
Treatises in Translation*. Medieval Law and Its Practice 21. Leiden:
Brill, 2016.

</div>

<div id="ref-brundage_teaching_2008" class="csl-entry">

Brundage, James A. “The Teaching and Study of Canon Law in the Law
Schools.” In *The History of Medieval Canon Law in the Classical Period,
1140-1234: From Gratian to the Decretals of Pope Gregory IX*, edited by
Wilfried Hartmann and Kenneth Pennington, 98–120. History of Medieval
Canon Law. Washington, D.C: Catholic University of America Press, 2008.

</div>

<div id="ref-chodorow_ecclesiology_1972" class="csl-entry">

Chodorow, Stanley. *Christian Political Theory and Church Politics in
the Mid-Twelfth Century; the Ecclesiology of Gratian’s Decretum*.
Publications of the Center for Medieval and Renaissance Studies,
U.C.L.A., 5. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972.

</div>

<div id="ref-corbino_pandectarum_1988" class="csl-entry">

Corbino, Alessandro, and Bernardo Santalucia, eds. *Justiniani Augusti
Pandectarum Codex Florentinus*. Firenze: Olschki, 1988.

</div>

<div id="ref-donahue_translating_1987" class="csl-entry">

Donahue, Charles. “On Translating the "Digest".” *Stanford Law Review*
39, no. 4 (1987): 1057–77.

</div>

<div id="ref-dufour_attrait_1979" class="csl-entry">

Dufour, Jean, Gérard Giordanegno, and André Gouron. “L’attrait des
’Leges’: Note sur la lettre d’un moine victorin (vers 1124/1127).”
*Studia et documenta historiae et iuris* 45 (1979): 504–29.

</div>

<div id="ref-duvernoy_registre_1965" class="csl-entry">

Duvernoy, Jean, ed. *Le Registre d’inquisition de Jacques Fournier,
évêque de Pamiers (1318-1325)*. Bibliothèque méridonale. 2. ser, t. 41.
Toulouse: É. Privat, 1965.

</div>

<div id="ref-gabriel_paris_1982" class="csl-entry">

Gabriel, Astrik L. “Paris, University Of.” In *Dictionary of the Middle
Ages*, edited by Joseph R. Strayer, 408–10. New York: Scribner, 1982.

</div>

<div id="ref-haskins_renaissance_1927" class="csl-entry">

Haskins, Charles Homer. *The Renaissance of the Twelfth Century*.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1927.

</div>

<div id="ref-hoeflich_establishment_2008" class="csl-entry">

Hoeflich, Michael H., and Jasonne M. Grabher. “The Establishment of
Normative Legal Texts: The Beginnings of the Ius Commune.” In *The
History of Medieval Canon Law in the Classical Period, 1140-1234: From
Gratian to the Decretals of Pope Gregory IX*, edited by Wilfried
Hartmann and Kenneth Pennington. History of Medieval Canon Law.
Washington, D.C: Catholic University of America Press, 2008.

</div>

<div id="ref-hyde_bologna_1982" class="csl-entry">

Hyde, J. K. “Bologna, University Of.” In *Dictionary of the Middle
Ages*, edited by Joseph R. Strayer, 2:311–13. New York: Scribner, 1982.

</div>

<div id="ref-jansen_roman_2009" class="csl-entry">

Jansen, Katherine Ludwig, Joanna H Drell, and Frances Andrews, eds.
“Roman Law and Legal Studies: Three Texts (Ca. 1124-66).” In *Medieval
Italy: Texts in Translation*, 167–72. The Middle Ages Series.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2009.

</div>

<div id="ref-kantorowicz_albertus_1907" class="csl-entry">

Kantorowicz, Hermann. *Albertus Gandinus und das Strafrecht der
Scholastik*. Vol. 1: Die Praxis. Berlin: J. Guttentag, 1907.

</div>

<div id="ref-kruger_corpus_1928" class="csl-entry">

Krüger, Paul, and Theodor Mommsen, eds. *Corpus Iuris Civilis*.
Berolini: apud Weidmannos, 1928.

</div>

<div id="ref-leader_oxford_1982" class="csl-entry">

Leader, Damian Riehl. “Oxford University.” In *Dictionary of the Middle
Ages*, edited by Joseph R. Strayer, 9:320–22. New York: Scribner, 1982.

</div>

<div id="ref-manaresi_placiti_1955" class="csl-entry">

Manaresi, Cesare, ed. *I placiti del "Regnum Italiae."*. Fonti per la
storia d’Italia, pubblicate dall’ Istituto storico italiano per il Medio
Evo 97. Roma: Tip. del Senato, 1955.

</div>

<div id="ref-martyn_letters_2004" class="csl-entry">

Martyn, John R. C., trans. *The Letters of Gregory the Great*. Mediaeval
Sources in Translation 40. Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval
Studies, 2004.

</div>

<div id="ref-mclaughlin_summa_1952" class="csl-entry">

McLaughlin, Terence P., ed. *The Summa Parisiensis on the Decretum
Gratiani*. Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1952.

</div>

<div id="ref-moore_formation_2007" class="csl-entry">

Moore, R. I. *The Formation of a Persecuting Society: Authority and
Deviance in Western Europe, 950-1250*. 2nd ed. Malden, MA: Blackwell
Publishing, 2007.

</div>

<div id="ref-muller_recovery_1990" class="csl-entry">

Müller, Wolfgang P. “The Recovery of Justinian’s Digest in the Middle
Ages.” *Bulletin of Medieval Canon Law* 20 (1990): 1–29.

</div>

<div id="ref-noonan_gratian_1979" class="csl-entry">

Noonan, John T. “Gratian Slept Here: The Changing Identity of the Father
of the Systematic Study of Canon Law.” *Traditio* 35 (January 1979):
145–72.

</div>

<div id="ref-norberg_registrum_1982" class="csl-entry">

Norberg, Dag Ludvig, ed. *S. Gregorii Magni Registrum epistularum, Libri
VIII-XIV, Appendix*. Corpus Christianorum. Series Latina, 140 A.
Turnholti: Brepols, 1982.

</div>

<div id="ref-pennington_short_2002" class="csl-entry">

Pennington, Kenneth. “A Short History of Canon Law from Apostolic Times
to 1917,” 2002. <http://legalhistorysources.com/Canon>.

</div>

<div id="ref-pennington_procedure_2004" class="csl-entry">

———. “Law, Criminal Procedure.” In *Dictionary of the Middle Ages.
Supplement 1*, edited by William C. Jordan, 309–20. New York: Scribner,
2004.

</div>

<div id="ref-pennington_beginnings_2018" class="csl-entry">

———. “The Beginnings of Law Schools in the Twelfth Century.” In *Les
écoles du XIIe siècle*, edited by Cédric Giraud. Leiden: Brill, 2018.

</div>

<div id="ref-pennington_biography_2014" class="csl-entry">

———. “The Biography of Gratian, the Father of Canon Law.” *Villanova Law
Review* 59 (2014): 679–706.

</div>

<div id="ref-radding_origins_1988" class="csl-entry">

Radding, Charles. *The Origins of Medieval Jurisprudence: Pavia and
Bologna, 850- 1150*. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1988.

</div>

<div id="ref-radding_corpus_2007" class="csl-entry">

Radding, Charles, and Antonio Ciaralli. *The Corpus Iuris Civilis in the
Middle Ages: Manuscripts and Transmission from the Sixth Century to the
Juristic Revival*. Brill’s Studies in Intellectual History, v. 147.
Leiden ; Boston: Brill, 2007.

</div>

<div id="ref-rashdall_universities_1936" class="csl-entry">

Rashdall, Hastings. *The Universities of Europe in the Middle Ages*. A
new edition, ed. by F. M. Powicke and A. B. Emden. London: Oxford Univ.
Press, 1936.

</div>

<div id="ref-ridder-symoens_universities_1992" class="csl-entry">

Ridder-Symoens, Hilde de, ed. *Universities in the Middle Ages*. History
of the University in Europe, v. 1. Cambridge \[England\] ; New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1992.

</div>

<div id="ref-somerville_prefaces_1998" class="csl-entry">

Somerville, Robert, and Bruce Clark Brasington, eds. *Prefaces to Canon
Law Books in Latin Christianity: Selected Translations, 500-1245*. New
Haven, Conn: Yale University Press, 1998.

</div>

<div id="ref-southern_scholastic_1995" class="csl-entry">

Southern, R. W. *Scholastic Humanism and the Unification of Europe*.
Vol. 1. Oxford, UK ; Cambridge, Mass., USA: Blackwell, 1995.

</div>

<div id="ref-thompson_treatise_1993" class="csl-entry">

Thompson, Augustine, and James Gordley, trans. *The Treatise on Laws:
(Decretum DD. 1-20)*. Studies in Medieval and Early Modern Canon Law, v.
2. Washington, D.C: Catholic University of America Press, 1993.

</div>

<div id="ref-verger_patterns_1992" class="csl-entry">

Verger, Jacques. “Patterns.” In *Universities in the Middle Ages*,
edited by Hilde de Ridder-Symoens, 35–74. History of the University in
Europe, v. 1. Cambridge \[England\] ; New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1992.

</div>

<div id="ref-watson_digest_1985" class="csl-entry">

Watson, Alan, ed. *The Digest of Justinian*. Philadelphia, Pa:
University of Pennsylvania Press, 1985.

</div>

<div id="ref-weigand_kanonisten_1990" class="csl-entry">

Weigand, Rudolf. “Frühe Kanonisten und ihre Karriere in der Kirche.”
*Zeitschrift der Savigny-Stiftung für Rechtsgeschichte. Kanonistische
Abteilung* 76 (1990): 135–55.

</div>

<div id="ref-weigand_development_2008" class="csl-entry">

———. “The Development of the Glossa Ordinaria to Gratian’s Decretum.” In
*The History of Medieval Canon Law in the Classical Period, 1140-1234:
From Gratian to the Decretals of Pope Gregory IX*, edited by Wilfried
Hartmann and Kenneth Pennington, 55–97. History of Medieval Canon Law.
Washington, D.C: Catholic University of America Press, 2008.

</div>

<div id="ref-winroth_schools_2009" class="csl-entry">

Winroth, Anders. “Law Schools in the Twelfth Century.” In *Mélanges en
l’honneur d’Anne Lefebvre-Teillard*, edited by Bernard d’Alteroche,
Florence Demoulin-Auzary, Olivier Deschamps, and Franck Roumy, 1057–64.
Paris: Éd. Panthéon-Assas, 2009.

</div>

<div id="ref-winroth_making_2000" class="csl-entry">

———. *The Making of Gratian’s Decretum*. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2000.

</div>

<div id="ref-winroth_teaching_2006" class="csl-entry">

———. “The Teaching of Law in the Twelfth Century.” In *Law and Learning
in the Middle Ages*, edited by Mia Münster-Swendsen and Helle Vogt,
41–62. Copenhagen: DJØF, 2006.

</div>

</div>

[1] Eight early manuscripts contain the gloss: "*Concordia discordantium
canonum iuxta determinationem Gratiani episcopi quae in duas partes
principaliter est divisa* (The agreement of disagreeing canons according
to the determination of Bishop Gratian, which is principally divided
into two parts.)" See below concerning whether, where, and when Gratian
served as a bishop. Bl = Baltimore, Walters Art Gallery 777; Gt = Ghent,
Bibl. der Rijksuniversiteit 55; Mt = Montecassino, Bibl. Abbaziale 66;
Pf = Paris, Bibl. Nationale lat. 3884 I and II; Po = Pommersfelden,
Bibl. des Grafen Schönborn 142 (2744); Ro = Rouen, Bibl. municipale E 21
(707); Sl = St. Paul im Lavant, Stiftsbibl. 25/1 (XXV.2.6); Tr = Trier,
Stadtbibl. 906 (1141). Gt, Pf, and Tr indicate that the *Decretum* has
two parts; Bl, Mt, Po, Ro, and Sl indicate that it has three. The
earliest version of the *Decretum* to survive in more than one
manuscript (the first recension) has two parts, while the most widely
circulated version (the second recension) has three. Part III of the
*Decretum* (*de Consecratione*) is outside the scope of this project,
the intent of which is to compare the earliest (first-recension) version
with the most widely circulated (second-recension) version for the
purpose of determining authorship of those parts of the text
traditionally attributed to Gratian himself. Part III is not found in
the first recension, therefore direct comparison is not possible. In any
event the class of text traditionally attributed to Gratian personally
(the sayings or *dicta*) are absent from Part III. Therefore, it is not
subject to comparative analysis using the techniques available for
examining Parts I and II. (John T. Noonan, “Gratian Slept Here: The
Changing Identity of the Father of the Systematic Study of Canon Law,”
*Traditio* 35 (January 1979): 154) Noonan lists Mazarine 1289 (possibly
a typo for Pm = Paris, Bibl. Mazarine 1287?) in place of Sl. (Rudolf
Weigand, “Frühe Kanonisten und ihre Karriere in der Kirche,”
*Zeitschrift der Savigny-Stiftung für Rechtsgeschichte. Kanonistische
Abteilung* 76 (1990): 135–55). (Kenneth Pennington, “The Biography of
Gratian, the Father of Canon Law,” *Villanova Law Review* 59 (2014):
698–700), supplements Noonan's discussion of these eight glosses.

The author of the preface to the *Summa Parisiensis* incorrectly thought
that Gratian himself had given the collection the title *Concordia
discordantium canonum*: "*Magister Gratianus, in hoc opere antonomasice
dictus Magister, loco proœmii talem suo præmisit libro titulum:
Concordia discordantium canonum, in quo materiam et intentionem breviter
exponit* (Master Gratian, antonomastically called in this work 'the
Master', in place of an introduction prefaced his book with the
following title, *Concord of discordant canons*, by which he concisely
sets forth subject matter and intention.)" (Terence P. McLaughlin, ed.,
*The Summa Parisiensis on the Decretum Gratiani* (Toronto: Pontifical
Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1952), 1) English translation from
(Robert Somerville and Bruce Clark Brasington, eds., *Prefaces to Canon
Law Books in Latin Christianity: Selected Translations, 500-1245* (New
Haven, Conn: Yale University Press, 1998), 201).

[2] The manuscript is Vat. Lat. 4030. (Jean Duvernoy, ed., *Le Registre
d’inquisition de Jacques Fournier, évêque de Pamiers (1318-1325)*,
Bibliothèque méridonale. 2. ser, t. 41 (Toulouse: É. Privat, 1965)) See
also [Inquisition Records of Jacques
Fournier](http://www.sjsu.edu/people/nancy.stork/jacquesfournier/) ("An
on-going English translation of the Inquisition Records of Jacques
Fournier, Bishop of Pamiers, France, 1318-1325") by Nancy P. Stork
(SJSU).

[3] "My listing of more than 600 manuscripts containing the *Decretum*
will appear in Kenneth Pennington and Wilfried Hartmann, eds., *History
of Medieval Canon Law*, 11." (Anders Winroth, *The Making of Gratian’s
Decretum* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 122n2) This
list has never made it into print to my knowledge. For a reasonably
complete and current list, see the entry for
[Gratian](http://amesfoundation.law.harvard.edu/BioBibCanonists/Report_Biobib2.php?record_id=a242)
in Kenneth Pennington's Bio-Bibliographical Guide to Medieval and Early
Modern Jurists hosted by the Ames Foundation at Harvard University.

[4] Gratian provided at minimum the outline for second part of the
*Decretum*. How closely the logic and arguments of the *dicta* follow
Gratian's classroom presentation, as opposed to being the student's own,
cannot be determined using statistical authorship attribution methods.

[5] For example, see (R. W. Southern, *Scholastic Humanism and the
Unification of Europe*, vol. 1 (Oxford, UK ; Cambridge, Mass., USA:
Blackwell, 1995), 310–18), for a discussion of the role that material
and political conditions played in the rise of Bologna and Paris as
major academic centers.

[6] "By the first decade of the thirteenth century the private schools
of canon law had become part of the corporate structure of the
universities in all three places \[Bologna, Paris, and Oxford\]." (James
A. Brundage, “The Teaching and Study of Canon Law in the Law Schools,”
in *The History of Medieval Canon Law in the Classical Period,
1140-1234: From Gratian to the Decretals of Pope Gregory IX*, ed.
Wilfried Hartmann and Kenneth Pennington, History of Medieval Canon Law
(Washington, D.C: Catholic University of America Press, 2008), 98–99).
Brundage here somewhat overstates the degree of institutional evolution
the proto-universities had attained at this time. The corporate
structure of the university had fully emerged by the first decade of the
thirteenth century only at Bologna. It did not do so at Paris and Oxford
until the second decade of the century. The standard handbooks on the
history of the university in medieval Europe, (Hastings Rashdall, *The
Universities of Europe in the Middle Ages*, A new edition, ed. by F. M.
Powicke and A. B. Emden (London: Oxford Univ. Press, 1936)) and (Hilde
de Ridder-Symoens, ed., *Universities in the Middle Ages*, History of
the University in Europe, v. 1 (Cambridge \[England\] ; New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1992)), are less helpful on this point than
might be hoped.

Bologna: "Bologna vies with Paris for the title of oldest and most
distinguished university of medieval Europe, but whereas Paris was
essentially a guild of masters, Bologna was in origin an association of
students. The *universitas scholarium* emerged around 1190 as an
organization of the non-Bolognese law students resident in the city, and
rapidly developed a complex constitution rather like that of
contemporary communes." (J. K. Hyde, “Bologna, University Of,” in
*Dictionary of the Middle Ages*, ed. Joseph R. Strayer, vol. 2 (New
York: Scribner, 1982), 311).

Oxford: "The origins of the university are shrouded in obscurity."
(Damian Riehl Leader, “Oxford University,” in *Dictionary of the Middle
Ages*, ed. Joseph R. Strayer, vol. 9 (New York: Scribner, 1982), 320).
"Oxford probably developed in the twelfth century out of an informal
group of masters teaching near St. Mary's Church. Among the first known
masters was Theobald of Étampes, who was lecturing before 1100 (ca.
1095) and continued until about 1125. This group of scholars seems to
have increased markedly following Henry II's prohibition of foreign
study in 1170, and by 1185 Gerald of Wales (Giraldus Cambrensis)
recorded that they were organized into several faculties (*doctores
diversarum facultatum*), which, although likely an exaggeration,
indicates there was a varied group of scholars. This development is
implied by several other late twelfth-century authorities as well."
(Leader, “Oxford University,” 320). "The university was first recognized
as a legal corporation by a legatine ordinance of 1214, ending a
dispersal of the university following a riot with the townsmen in 1209."
(Leader, “Oxford University,” 320).

Paris: "The school of Notre Dame Cathedral on the Cité, and the Abbey of
St. Victor and the collegiate church of Ste. Geneviève on the Left Bank
of the Seine had already by the end of the twelfth century attracted
such famous masters as Hugh of St. Victor, Peter Abelard, Stephen of
Tournai, and Peter Lombard. In 1180 Alexander Neckham was able to write
of an 'honorable society of masters' who were teaching arts, theology,
canon law, and medicine, disciplines that would later form the four
faculties of the university. At this time, the right to teach (*licentia
docendi*) and therefore to become a master was given out by the
chancellor of the cathedral chapter of Notre Dame." (Astrik L. Gabriel,
“Paris, University Of,” in *Dictionary of the Middle Ages*, ed. Joseph
R. Strayer (New York: Scribner, 1982), 408). "The masters organized
themselves into an association between 1180 and 1210, later called
*universitas magistrorum et discipulorum*, and both kings and popes
granted it protective privileges." (Gabriel, “Paris, University Of,”
408). "In the beginning, Paris church officials opposed the formation of
this independent society, which claimed legal status and its own seal.
The papacy, however, sided with the university. Rules regulating its
operation, called 'statutes', were granted in 1215 by Robert Courson,
papal legate, and these dealt specifically with curriculum and
textbooks." (Gabriel, “Paris, University Of,” 408).

[7] This distinction between old and new law comes from the preface of
[Bernardus
Papiensis](http://amesfoundation.law.harvard.edu/BioBibCanonists/Report_Biobib2.php?record_id=a061)
(†1213) to his Breviary of *Extravagantia* or First Compilation, c.1191.
(Somerville and Brasington, *Prefaces to Canon Law Books in Latin
Christianity*, 219, 230–31)

[8] Jacques Verger, “Patterns,” in *Universities in the Middle Ages*,
ed. Hilde de Ridder-Symoens, History of the University in Europe, v. 1
(Cambridge \[England\] ; New York: Cambridge University Press, 1992),
37–41.

[9] "Four steps would seem to have been pre-eminently necessary to give
to mere customary meetings of masters for the initiation of new members
or similar purposes the character of a definite and legally recognized
corporation: (1) the reduction of their unwritten customs to the form of
written statutes or by-laws, (2) the recognition or (if authoritative
recognition was unnecessary) the exercise of the right to sue and be
sued as a corporation, (3) the appointment of permanent common officers,
(4) the use of a common seal." (Rashdall, *The Universities of Europe in
the Middle Ages*, 299).

Medieval law knew no regular procedure for incorporation. Every effort
to form a corporation therefore involved an intensive and frequently
protracted effort to persuade the relevant authority, whether pope,
emperor, king or commune, to grant the privilege. In addition, medieval
legal thought tended to conceive of rights rather more concretely than
modern legal systems do. Every right or privilege was thought of as
coming at the expense of some other right-holder, and therefore attempts
by the early universities to form corporations were contested by those,
usually local bishops, at whose expense the exclusive right to confer a
license to teach was being secured.

Although the right of a faculty or university to own property might be
considered necessary to realizing any aspirations toward institutional
permanence, in practice, academic corporations avoided property
ownership in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Indeed, the fact that
they tended to rent rather than own the lands and buildings they used
could become a powerful weapon in the event of "town vs. gown" conflict,
allowing the university to credibly threaten to relocate elsewhere, as
the masters and students of Oxford did in 1209. (Rashdall, 406).

[10] Rudolf Weigand, “The Development of the Glossa Ordinaria to
Gratian’s Decretum,” in *The History of Medieval Canon Law in the
Classical Period, 1140-1234: From Gratian to the Decretals of Pope
Gregory IX*, ed. Wilfried Hartmann and Kenneth Pennington, History of
Medieval Canon Law (Washington, D.C: Catholic University of America
Press, 2008), 82–86.

[11] Weigand, 88–91.

[12] The Digest was not recovered all at once, but in three parts: the
*Digestum vetus* (Dig. 1.1-24.2), the *Infortiatum* (Dig. 24.3-38.17),
and the *Digestum novum* (Dig. 39.1-50.17). (Manlio Bellomo, *The Common
Legal Past of Europe: 1000-1800*, Studies in Medieval and Early Modern
Canon Law, v. 4 (Washington, D.C: Catholic University of America Press,
1995), 62–63). (Wolfgang P. Müller, “The Recovery of Justinian’s Digest
in the Middle Ages,” *Bulletin of Medieval Canon Law* 20 (1990): 1–29).
(Michael H. Hoeflich and Jasonne M. Grabher, “The Establishment of
Normative Legal Texts: The Beginnings of the Ius Commune,” in *The
History of Medieval Canon Law in the Classical Period, 1140-1234: From
Gratian to the Decretals of Pope Gregory IX*, ed. Wilfried Hartmann and
Kenneth Pennington, History of Medieval Canon Law (Washington, D.C:
Catholic University of America Press, 2008), 5). The standard modern
edition of the *Digest* can be found in (Paul Krüger and Theodor
Mommsen, eds., *Corpus Iuris Civilis* (Berolini: apud Weidmannos,
1928)). There is a recent English translation of the *Digest* in (Alan
Watson, ed., *The Digest of Justinian* (Philadelphia, Pa: University of
Pennsylvania Press, 1985)). \[See review in (Charles Donahue, “On
Translating the "Digest",” *Stanford Law Review* 39, no. 4 (1987):
1057–77).\] There is an excellent facsimile edition of the *Codex
Florentinus* (Firenze, Biblioteca Laurenziana, *sine numero*), the
sixth- or seventh-century manuscript that served at least indirectly as
the basis for the eleventh- and twelfth-century recovery of the *Digest*
in (Alessandro Corbino and Bernardo Santalucia, eds., *Justiniani
Augusti Pandectarum Codex Florentinus* (Firenze: Olschki, 1988)).

[13] The reference is to Dig. 48.4.7.3. "XIII, 49 Iohanni defensori
exempla legum tradit, secundum quas iudicet" in (Dag Ludvig Norberg,
ed., *S. Gregorii Magni Registrum epistularum, Libri VIII-XIV,
Appendix*, Corpus Christianorum. Series Latina, 140 A (Turnholti:
Brepols, 1982), 1058–64). Translated as "13.49 Gregory to John, his
defender, going to Spain. An example of a law," August 603, in (John R.
C. Martyn, trans., *The Letters of Gregory the Great*, Mediaeval Sources
in Translation 40 (Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies,
2004), 863–66).

[14]  (Cesare Manaresi, ed., *I placiti del "Regnum Italiae."*, Fonti
per la storia d’Italia, pubblicate dall’ Istituto storico italiano per
il Medio Evo 97 (Roma: Tip. del Senato, 1955), 333–35). (no. 437) The
*Marturi placitum* does not explicitly identify the passage in the
*Digest* to which the citation refers, but the fact that the legal
principle being invoked is *restitutio in integrum* is by itself
sufficient to narrow it down to *Dig*. 4. Radding and Ciaralli identify
the passage as *Dig*. 4.6.26.4 (with some wording borrowed from *Dig*.
4.1.5). (Charles Radding and Antonio Ciaralli, *The Corpus Iuris Civilis
in the Middle Ages: Manuscripts and Transmission from the Sixth Century
to the Juristic Revival*, Brill’s Studies in Intellectual History, v.
147 (Leiden ; Boston: Brill, 2007), 183–84). Nordillus, the judge,
decided the case "*lege Digestorum libris inserta considerata* (after he
considered the law inserted into the books of the *Digest*)"
\[translation suggested by Atria Larson\]. The translation turns on the
interpretation of the participial adjective *inserta*. "I think the
straight-up 'inserted' makes sense here. The writer would seem to be
noticing that the Digest is not itself *lex* but includes commentary on
the *lex*, the written law, and refers to and inserts many elements of
*lex* throughout." (Atria Larson, email to Paul Evans, July 21, 2017.)
The alternative is to translate *inserta* as "introduced," describing a
passage from the Digest that an advocate for one or the other of the
litigants brought to the attention of the court in support of their case
as having been "introduced." For an English translation of the *Marturi
placitum*, see (Bruce Clark Brasington, ed., *Order in the Court:
Medieval Procedural Treatises in Translation*, Medieval Law and Its
Practice 21 (Leiden: Brill, 2016)). (See [West Texas A&M University:
Order in the Court: Medieval Procedural Treatises in
Translation](http://www.wtamu.edu/academics/order-in-the-court.aspx).)

[15] D.1 c.8. *Decretum Gratiani*, First Recension, edition in progress.
Anders Winroth, 3/21/2017, 2. English translation from (Augustine
Thompson and James Gordley, trans., *The Treatise on Laws: (Decretum DD.
1-20)*, Studies in Medieval and Early Modern Canon Law, v. 2
(Washington, D.C: Catholic University of America Press, 1993), 7).

[16] D.1 c.12. *Decretum Gratiani*, First Recension, edition in
progress. Anders Winroth, 3/21/2017, 3.

[17] Charles Radding, *The Origins of Medieval Jurisprudence: Pavia and
Bologna, 850- 1150* (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1988).

[18] Winroth, *The Making of Gratian’s Decretum*, 146–48.

[19] Winroth, 148–51.

[20] Winroth, 153–56.

[21] Chodorow explains Gratian's "deletion" of Roman law as a
consequence of what he sees as Gratian's adherence to the party of the
papal chancellor Haimeric and proponents of the Concordat of Worms
(1122). (Stanley Chodorow, *Christian Political Theory and Church
Politics in the Mid-Twelfth Century; the Ecclesiology of Gratian’s
Decretum*, Publications of the Center for Medieval and Renaissance
Studies, U.C.L.A., 5 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972),
60–63).

[22] Winroth, *The Making of Gratian’s Decretum*, 151–53.

[23]  (Anders Winroth, “Law Schools in the Twelfth Century,” in
*Mélanges en l’honneur d’Anne Lefebvre-Teillard*, ed. Bernard
d’Alteroche et al. (Paris: Éd. Panthéon-Assas, 2009), 1060) For the text
of the letter, see (Jean Dufour, Gérard Giordanegno, and André Gouron,
“L’attrait des ’Leges’: Note sur la lettre d’un moine victorin (vers
1124/1127),” *Studia et documenta historiae et iuris* 45 (1979): 504–29)
For an English translation of the letter, see Anonymous, Letter to Abbot
B\[ernard III\] of Saint-Victor, Marseille (1124/27) in (Katherine
Ludwig Jansen, Joanna H Drell, and Frances Andrews, eds., “Roman Law and
Legal Studies: Three Texts (Ca. 1124-66),” in *Medieval Italy: Texts in
Translation*, trans. Sean Gilsdorf, The Middle Ages Series
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2009), 167–72).

[24] "\[O\]mnibus, qui causa studiorum peregrinantur, scolaribus et
maxime divinarum atque sacrarum legum professoribus hoc nostre pietatis
beneficium indulgemus, ut ad loca, in quibus litterarum exercentur
studium, tam ipsi quam eorum nuntii veniant et habitent in eis securi."
(Heinrich Appelt, ed., *Die Urkunden der deutschen Könige und Kaiser*,
vol. X,2, Monumenta Germaniae historica. Diplomata regum et imperatorum
Germaniae (Berlin: Weidmannsche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1979), 39). "\[W\]e
bestow this pious gift upon all who travel for the purpose of study,
students and especially teachers of divine and sacred laws: namely, that
they as well as their messengers may travel safely to the place where
they are engaged in the study of letters and safely dwell there."
(Jansen, Drell, and Andrews, “Roman Law and Legal Studies,” 167–72).

The date of *Authentica Habita* is uncertain. Frederick ordered the
constitution inserted into the *Codex* as an act of imperial propaganda.
No medieval manuscripts of the *Codex* give a date for the proclamation.
Early modern print editions of the *Codex*, however, associated it with
the Diet of Roncaglia in November 1158, and modern editions have
retained the ascribed date. (Kenneth Pennington, “The Beginnings of Law
Schools in the Twelfth Century,” in *Les écoles du XIIe siècle*, ed.
Cédric Giraud (Leiden: Brill, 2018)) (p.20, fn.53 in MS Word version.)
The uncertainty arises because a contemporary poem, the *Carmen de
gestis Frederici I. Imperatoris in Lombardia* gives a first-hand account
of an incident that took place near Bologna in 1155 in which Frederick,
in response to a petition brought by a deputation of doctors and
scholars from the city, issued a proclamation matching the description
of *Authentica Habita*. Some modern scholars attempt to split the
difference by accepting the November 1158 date for the version of the
text that we have, but characterizing it as a re-issue of the 1155
proclamation described the *Carmen de gestis*. There appears to be no
good reason to believe that *Authentica Habita* was promulgated twice,
in 1155 and 1158, as opposed to just once, in 1155. In any event, the
uncertainty (within a narrow and circumscribed range) about the date
*Authentica Habita* was promulgated does not take anything away from the
validity of the point Pennington is making.

[25] Kenneth Pennington, “A Short History of Canon Law from Apostolic
Times to 1917,” 2002, 17, <http://legalhistorysources.com/Canon>.

[26] It is true that *Authentica Habita* does not mention Bologna
explicitly, but instead refers to "the place where they are engaged in
the study of letters." But *Authentica Habita* does specifically mention
"students and especially teachers of divine and sacred laws" so it is
not clear to me why both Pennington and Winroth contest the latter
point. "It \[*Authentica Habita*\] did not mention Bologna nor law
students." (Pennington, “The Beginnings of Law Schools in the Twelfth
Century”) (p.18 in MS Word version.) "The law \[*Authentica Habita*\]
does not mention Bologna at all, nor does it mention studies of law."
(Anders Winroth, “The Teaching of Law in the Twelfth Century,” in *Law
and Learning in the Middle Ages*, ed. Mia Münster-Swendsen and Helle
Vogt (Copenhagen: DJØF, 2006), 41–62) (pp.7-8 in MS Word version.) "The
Teaching of Law in the Twelfth Century" has since been superseded by
"Law Schools in the Twelfth Century," which does not mention *Authentica
Habita*.

[27]  (Hermann Kantorowicz, *Albertus Gandinus und das Strafrecht der
Scholastik*, vol. 1: Die Praxis (Berlin: J. Guttentag, 1907), 203–18)
See also (Kenneth Pennington, “Law, Criminal Procedure,” in *Dictionary
of the Middle Ages. Supplement 1*, ed. William C. Jordan (New York:
Scribner, 2004), 309–20).

[28] Charles Homer Haskins, *The Renaissance of the Twelfth Century*
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1927).

[29] R.I. Moore observes that the establishment of the new order brought
about by the legal revolution "required another change, no less
profound: the replacement of warriors by literate clerks as the agents
of government and the confidants of princes." (R. I. Moore, *The
Formation of a Persecuting Society: Authority and Deviance in Western
Europe, 950-1250*, 2nd ed (Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2007),
128).
